Chapter 1 A MISERABLE CHRISTMAS
Chapter 1 A MISERABLE CHRISTMAS
'I do think these Christmas holidays have been the worst we've ever had,' said Dick.
'Jolly bad luck on old George, coming to stay with us for Christmas - and then us all going down withthose awful colds and coughs,' said Julian.
'Yes - and being in bed on Christmas Day was horrible,' said George. 'The worst of it was I couldn'teat anything. Fancy not being hungry on Christmas Day! I never thought that would happen to me!'
'Timmy was the only one of us who didn't get ill,' said Anne, patting him. 'You were a pet, Tim, whenwe were in bed. You divided your time between us nicely.'
'Woof!' said Timmy, rather solemnly. He hadn't been at all happy this Christmas. To have four of thefive in bed, coughing and sneezing, was quite unheard of!
'Well, anyhow, we're all up again,' said Dick. 'Though my legs don't really feel as if they belong tome yet!'
'Oh - do yours feel like that too?' asked George. 'I was quite worried about mine!'
'We all feel the same,' said Julian, 'but we shall be quite different in a day or two - now we're up.
Anyway - we go back to school next week - so we'd better feel all right!'
Everyone groaned - and then coughed. 'That's the worst of this germ we've had, whatever it is,'
said George. 'If we laugh - or speak loudly - or groan - we start coughing. I shall go completely madif I don't get rid of my cough. It keeps me awake for hours at night!'
Anne went to the window. 'It's been snowing again,' she said. 'Not much - but it looks lovely. Tothink we might have been out in it all last week. I do think it's too bad to have holidays like this.'
George joined her at the window. A car drew up outside and a burly, merry-looking man got out andhurried up the steps to the front door.
'Here's the doctor,' said Anne. 'I bet he'll say we're all quite all right to go back to school next week!'
In a minute or two the door opened and the doctor came into the room, with the mother of Julian,Dick and Anne. She looked tired - and no wonder! Looking after four ill children and a mostmiserable dog over Christmas had not been an easy job!
2'Well, here they are - all up and about now!' said Mrs. Barnard. 'They look pretty down in the mouth,don't they?'
'Oh - they'll soon perk up,' said Dr. Drew, sitting down and looking at each of the four in turn.
'George looks the worst - not so strong as the others, I suppose.'
George went red with annoyance, and Dick chuckled. 'Poor George is the weakling of the family,' hesaid. 'She had the highest temperature, the worst cough, and the loudest groans, and she...'
But whatever else he was going to say was lost beneath the biggest cushion in the room, which anangry George had flung at him with all her might. Dick flung it back, and everyone began to laugh,George too. That set all the four coughing, of course, and the doctor put his hands to his ears.
'Will they be well enough to go to school, Doctor?' asked Mrs. Barnard anxiously.
'Well, yes - they would - but they ought to get rid of those coughs first,' said the doctor. He lookedout of the window at the snow. 'I wonder now - no - I don't suppose it's possible - but...'
'But what?' said Dick, pricking up his ears at once. 'Going to send us to Switzerland for a skiingholiday, Doc? Fine! Absolutely smashing!'
The doctor laughed. 'You're going too fast!' he said. 'No - I wasn't actually thinking of Switzerland -but perhaps somewhere hilly, not far from the sea. Somewhere really bracing, but not too cold -where the snow will lie, so that you can toboggan and ski, but without travelling as far asSwitzerland. Switzerland is expensive, you know!'
'Yes. I suppose it is,' said Julian. 'No - we can't expect a holiday in Switzerland just because we'vehad beastly colds! But I must say a week somewhere would be jolly nice!'
'Oh yes!' said George, her eyes shining. 'It would really make up for these miserable holidays!
Do you mean all by ourselves, Doctor? We'd love that.'
'Well, no - someone ought to be there, surely,' said Dr. Drew. 'But that's up to your parents.'
'I think it's a jolly good idea,' said Julian. 'Mother - don't you think so? I'm sure you're longing to berid of us all for a while. You look worn out!'
His mother smiled. 'Well - if it's what you need - a short holiday somewhere to get rid of your coughs- you must have it. And I won't say that I shan't enjoy a little rest while you're enjoying yourselveshaving a good time! I'll talk it over with your father.'
'Woof!' said Timmy, looking enquiringly at the doctor, both ears pricked high.
3'He says - he needs a rest somewhere too,' explained George. 'He wants to know if he can come withus.'
'Let's have a look at your tongue, Timmy, and give me your paw to feel if it's hot or not,' said Dr.
Drew, gravely. He held out his hand, and Timmy obediently put his paw into it.
The four children laughed - and immediately began to cough again. How they coughed! The doctorshook his head at them. 'What a din! I shouldn't have made you laugh. Now I shan't be coming to seeyou again until just before you go back to school. I expect your mother will let me know when thatday comes. Goodbye till then - and have a good time, wherever you go!'
'We will!' said Julian. 'And thanks for bothering about us so much. We'll send you a card when ourcoughs are gone!'
As soon as Dr. Drew had driven off in his car, there was a conference. 'We can go off somewhere,can't we, Mother?' said Dick, eagerly. 'The sooner the better! You must be tired to death of ourcoughs, night and day!'
'Yes. I think you must go somewhere for a week or ten days,' said his mother. 'But the question is- where? You could go off to George's home, I suppose - Kirrin Cottage... but it's not high up...
and besides, George's father would certainly not welcome four coughs like yours!'
'No. He'd go mad at once,' said George. 'He'd fling open his study door - and stride into our room- and shout 'Who's mak...' '
But as George began to shout, she coughed - and that was the end of her little piece of acting!
'That's enough, George,' said her aunt. 'For goodness' sake, go and get a drink of water.'
There was much debating about where they could go for a little while, and all the time they weretalking the snow fell steadily. Dick went to the window, pleased.
'If only we could find a place high up on a hill, just as the doctor said, a place where we could use ourtoboggans, and our skis,' he said. 'Gosh, it makes me feel better already to think of it. I do hope thissnow goes on and on.'
'I think I'd better ring up a holiday agency and see if they can offer us something sensible,' said hismother. 'Maybe a summer camp set up on a hill would do - it would be empty now, and you couldhave the choice of a hut or a chalet or something.'
But all her telephoning came to nothing! 'No,' said the agencies. 'Sorry - we haven't anything tosuggest. Our camps are all closed down now. No - we know of no winter ones in this country at all!'
4And then, as so often happens, the problem was suddenly solved by somebody no one had thought ofasking ... old Jenkins, the gardener! There was nothing for him to do that day except sweep a paththrough the snow. He saw the children watching him from the window, grinned and came up to them.
'How are you?' he shouted. 'Would you like some apples? They've ripened nicely now, those lateones. Your mother said you weren't feeling like apples - or pears either. But maybe you're ready forsome now.'
'Yes! We are!' shouted Julian, not daring to open the window in case his mother came in and wasangry to see him standing with his head out in the cold. 'Bring them in, Jenkins. Come and talk to us!'
So old Jenkins came in, carrying a basket of ripe, yellow apples, and some plump, brown-yellowpears.
'And how are you now?' he said, in his soft Welsh voice, for he came from the Welsh mountains.
'It's pale you are, and thin too. Ah, it's the mountain air of Wales you want!'
He smiled all over his wrinkled brown face, handing round his basket. The children helpedthemselves to the fruit.
'Mountain air - that's what the doctor ordered!' said Julian, biting into a juicy pear. 'I suppose youdon't know somewhere like that we could go to, do you, Jenkins?'
'Well, my aunt now, she lets rooms in the summertime!' said Jenkins. 'And a good cook she is, myAunt Glenys. But the winter-time now - I'm not knowing if she'd do it then, what with the snow andall. Her farm's on the hillside, man - and the slope runs right down to the sea. A fine place it is in thesummer - but there'll be nothing but snow there now, sure as I'm telling you.'
'But - it sounds exactly right,' said Anne, delighted. 'Doesn't it, Ju? Let's call Mother! Mother!
Mother, where are you?'
Her mother came running in, afraid that one of the children was feeling ill again. She was mostastonished to see old Jenkins there - and even more astonished to hear the four children pouring outwhat he had just told them. Timmy added a few excited barks, and Jenkins stood twirling his old hat,quite overcome.
The excitement made Julian and Dick cough distressingly. 'Now listen to me,' said their mother,firmly. 'Go straight upstairs, and take another dose of your cough medicine. I'll talk to Jenkins andfind out what all this is about. No - don't interrupt, Dick. GO!'
5They went at once, and left their mother talking to the bewildered gardener. 'Blow this cough!'
said Dick, pouring out his usual dose. 'Gosh, I hope Mother fixes up something with Jenkins'
aunt. If I don't go off somewhere and lose this cough, I shall go mad - stark, staring mad!'
'I bet we'll go to his old aunt,' said Julian. 'That's if she'll take us. It's the kind of sudden idea thatclicks - don't you think so?'
Julian was right. The idea did 'click'. His mother had actually met Jenkins' old aunt that spring, whenshe had come to visit her relations, and Jenkins had brought her proudly up to the house to introduceher to the cook. So when Dick and Julian went downstairs again, they were met with good news.
'I'm telephoning to Jenkins' aunt, old Mrs. Jones,' said their mother. 'And if she'll take you - well offyou can go in a day or two - coughs and all!'
1.悲惨圣诞
悲惨圣诞
“这可能是我经历过的最倒霉的圣诞节了。”迪克说。
“更倒霉的要数乔治了吧。她特意来和我们一起过圣诞，结果跟着我们一起染上了重感冒。”朱利安说道。
“是啊！想想圣诞节得乖乖待在床上养病，简直可怕！”乔治说，“最糟糕的是什么美味我都吃不了，圣诞节肯定要挨饿了！真没想到我也有这么一天！”
“唯一没生病的只有蒂米了，”安妮一边轻轻拍它一边说，“我们都病在床上的时候，只有你会轮流和我们每个人玩！你真好！”
“汪！”蒂米低吠了一声，神情严肃。整个圣诞，它过得一点都不开心。侦探团中有四个人都病恹恹地瘫在床上，不是咳嗽就是打喷嚏，这阵势也是难得一见了！
“无论怎样，我们都振作一点。”迪克继续说，“尽管我的双腿已经快没知觉了！”
“啊！你也是这种感觉吗？”乔治问，“我好害怕！”
“其实我们都是这种感觉，”朱利安说，“但过上一两天，肯定都会好起来的，我们都振作一点。不管怎么说，下周我们都得回学校上课了，所以最好能快点痊愈。”
大家都呻吟着、咳嗽着。“这是我们染上的最厉害的病毒了，”乔治说，“只要我们大笑、大声说话或者小声清嗓，就会咳嗽。如果不把咳嗽治好，我会崩溃的，我在夜里翻来覆去的，一点都睡不好。”
安妮走到窗户边赞叹道：“又开始下雪了。下得不大，但是看起来美极了。想想上周，我们本该在户外尽情玩耍，现在却一直被困在这里。这样度假过节真是太没意思了。”
乔治也走到窗户边来。这时，一辆小汽车停在了门口，一个身材魁梧、面容和善的男人从车里出来，他急匆匆走到了房门口。
“医生来了。”安妮说，“我敢打赌，他会说我们下周就能痊愈，然后返回学校上课！”
过了一两分钟，孩子们房间的门开了，医生进来了。朱利安、迪克、安妮的妈妈也跟了进来，她看起来疲惫极了。不过也没什么可大惊小怪的，毕竟在圣诞节照顾四个生病的孩子和一只闷闷不乐的狗，不是一份简单的差事。
“看吧，都在这儿了，你们都起来坐好了！”巴纳德太太说，“他们看上去脸色不太好，对吧？”
“别担心，他们很快就会好起来的。”德鲁医生一边回答，一边坐着轮流给四个孩子看病，“乔治看起来病得最重，我估计她体质没有其他几个孩子好。”
被医生这么一说，乔治怒气冲冲，脸涨得通红。迪克捧着肚子“咯咯”笑：“可怜的乔治是家里最虚弱的：烧得最高，咳得最响，呻吟得最大声，而且她……”
迪克嘴里的话还没说出口，就被房间里最大的一块靠垫给盖住了，这是乔治使出全身力气扔过去的。迪克把它扔了回来，房间里每个人，包括乔治在内，都笑得前仰后合。这么一闹，四个孩子又开始咳嗽了，医生不得不用手堵住耳朵。
“医生，他们能恢复健康回学校上课吗？”巴纳德太太焦虑地问。
“放心吧，没事的，他们会好起来的。但是首先得治好他们的咳嗽。”医生说，他透过窗户，看着外面的皑皑白雪，“我刚才在想，尽管貌似不太可能，但是……”
“但是什么？”迪克立刻竖起耳朵，抢着说：“送我们去瑞士滑雪吗，医生？好！我一定奉陪到底！”
医生笑着回答：“你接得太快了！没有，我想的不是瑞士，但是去某个有山，而且靠近大海的地方玩一玩倒是可以。去一个被积雪覆盖、温度低但又不太冷的地方，你们就可以带上雪橇去滑雪，也不用去瑞士那么远的地方度假了。而且，去一趟瑞士多贵呀！”
“是啊！我猜肯定很贵。”朱利安说道，“再说了，我们得了该死的重感冒，就别妄想去瑞士度假了！但是去其他地方待上一周肯定也很不错！”
“那太棒了！”乔治一边说一边期待着，双眼炯炯闪光，“这样才能弥补这个悲惨的假日！医生，您的意思是让我们几个小孩结伴去玩就行了，对吗？我们万分乐意！”
“不是，你们当然应该找个大人陪着，”德鲁医生回答道，“但这也得由你们父母决定。”
“我觉得这个提议真的不错，”朱利安说，“妈妈，您觉得呢？我相信您也想清静清静。您看起来非常疲惫！”
妈妈微笑道：“好吧，如果去度个假能治好你们的咳嗽，那一定得去。你们去度假放松，我也能休息一下！我再跟你们的爸爸谈谈。”
“汪！”蒂米叫了一声，期待地看着医生，两只耳朵竖得老高。
“它说，它也需要某个地方放松放松，”乔治在一旁帮腔，“它想知道它能跟我们一起去吗？”
“那蒂米你伸出舌头来让我看看，然后把爪子放到我手上，让我看一下你有没有发烧。”德鲁医生严肃地对蒂米说。随后，医生伸出手，蒂米也乖乖地递上了爪子。
见此情景，四个孩子大笑起来，但是马上又开始咳嗽，咳嗽声此起彼伏。医生笑着对他们摇了摇头：“真的太吵了！我不该逗你们笑的。那么，等你们要回学校的时候再见吧！我相信你们的妈妈到时候会联系我的，再见啦！不管你们去哪里，都预祝你们玩得开心！”
“一定的！”朱利安说道，“真是劳您费心了，谢谢关心。等我们病好了，就第一时间通知您！”
德鲁医生一坐上小车飞驰而去，大家就开始商量起来。“让我们去度假吧，妈妈！”迪克恳求道，“越快越好！整日整夜听着一阵阵咳嗽，您肯定都受不了了！”
“可以！你们可以去某地待上一周或十来天。”妈妈回答说，“但问题是，去哪里呢？对了，你们可以去乔治家呀。如果没记错的话应该是科林庄园，但是科林海拔不高，而且乔治的爸爸肯定受不了四个‘咳嗽王’。”
“是的！他会立马翻脸不认人的，”乔治说，“他肯定会从书房里摔门而出，大步流星跑到我们的卧室大吼：‘是谁……’。”
正当乔治准备学着大吼的时候，她又开始咳嗽了。这段声情并茂的表演也以咳嗽草草收场。
“别说了，乔治，”巴纳德太太说，“让人省省心吧，去喝杯水去。”
关于他们要去哪里度假，孩子们争论不休，窗外的大雪也窸窸窣窣地不断飘落。迪克走到窗边，满是欢喜。
“要是我们能找到一个医生提议的小山丘该多好啊，上面覆盖着皑皑白雪，我们就能滑雪、玩雪橇了。”他说，“天啊，光是想想我就感觉神清气爽！希望这雪一直下，一直下。”
“我还是给旅行社打个电话，问问有没有合适的目的地。”妈妈说，“或许某个山丘上还有夏令营时留下的帐篷呢，虽然现在它可能是空的，但你们至少有的选择了。”
但是，打了一圈电话，结果都不大令人满意。“没有，”旅行社回答，“不好意思，我们不提供此类服务。所有的营房现在都不开放。据我们所知，全国上下都没有类似的冬令营。”
但是紧接着，像往常一样，问题不一会儿便迎刃而解了。而解决这个难题的人却是大家都没想到的园丁老伯——詹金斯。当天，除了需要从大雪中扫出一条道路，詹金斯没什么其他事做。他看到孩子们正透过窗户看着自己，便高高兴兴地迎到他们跟前去。
“孩子们好一点了吗？”他大喊道，“你们想吃苹果吗？这些晚熟的苹果都熟透了。巴纳德太太说你们感冒了，不能吃苹果，也不能吃梨。但或许你们现在已经康复了，大家想尝尝吗？”
“是的！我们想吃！”朱利安只能站在屋里扯着嗓子大喊，因为不敢打开窗户伸出头去，以免被妈妈看见又惹她生气，“拿进来吧，詹金斯。来和我们聊聊。”
詹金斯走进屋子，手里拎了一筐熟透的黄苹果，还有一些大个头的棕黄色梨子。
“感冒好些了吗？”他一进门便轻声问道，满嘴威尔士口音，不过他确实来自威尔士山区，“你们看起来脸色苍白，弱不禁风。哎，你们真该去威尔士山里呼吸呼吸新鲜空气。”
他笑了起来，棕色的脸上爬满了皱纹。他放下果篮，孩子们争相取了水果吃。
“山里的空气——医生也是这样建议的！”朱利安一边说，一边津津有味地吃着，“但您也不知道哪里有类似的地方能休养吧，詹金斯？”
“有倒是有，我姑姑格莱尼丝在夏季会出租房间！”詹金斯回答，“她可是一名大厨。但现在是冬天，我不确定她还有没有继续经营，毕竟周围被大雪重重覆盖着。她的农场在山坡上，山坡可以一直延伸到海边。在夏天，确实是不可多得的度假胜地。但是现在除了大雪，什么都没有。我只是实话实说罢了。”
“别担心，听起来已经棒极了！”安妮高兴地回答，“对吧，朱利安？我们叫妈妈过来吧！妈妈，妈妈，快来。”
妈妈赶紧跑了进来，生怕又有哪个孩子感觉不舒服。看到詹金斯老伯站在那里，她吃了一惊。四个孩子向她倾吐刚刚的计划，这让她更为吃惊。蒂米也激动地叫了好几声，而詹金斯站在一旁叠着旧帽，相当淡定。
一激动，朱利安和迪克又开始猛烈咳嗽。“给我乖乖听着，”妈妈神情坚定地说着，“现在上楼去，再吃一剂咳嗽药。我会和詹金斯详细沟通。别说话，也别打断我。迪克，上楼！”
他们立刻乖乖转身上楼。只剩下妈妈和一头雾水的园丁在那儿。“让感冒赶紧好起来！”迪克一边说，一边喝下感冒冲剂，“天啊！希望妈妈和詹金斯的姑姑沟通顺利啊！如果我们哪儿也没去成，感冒又好了，我会疯掉的，彻头彻尾疯掉！”
“我敢打赌我们肯定会去他姑姑家，”朱利安说，“如果她决定好了要收留我们，肯定是某种突发奇想，你们觉得呢？”
朱利安说得对，这个想法确实是灵光一现。实际上妈妈在初春走亲访友的时候，就见过詹金斯姑姑。而且，詹金斯骄傲地领着妈妈到房间里，还郑重其事地介绍了他的大厨姑姑。所以，迪克和朱利安下楼后，便听到了好消息。
“我已经打电话给詹金斯姑姑——琼斯老太太，”妈妈说，“如果她同意收留你们几个的话，你们就去住上一两天吧。不管咳嗽好没好，你们都可以去！”
Chapter 2 OFF TO MAGGA GLEN
Chapter 2 OFF TO MAGGA GLEN
Everything was soon settled. Old Mrs. Jones, whose voice came remarkably clearly over the long-distance call, seemed delighted to take the four children.
'Yes, Mam. I understand. Oh, their coughs won't last a day here, don't you be fretting, Mam. Andhow's my nephew, Ifor Jenkins, Mam? It's hoping I am that he's still pleasing you. A wild boy hewas, and...'
'Mother! Tell her we're bringing a dog, too,' said Julian, in his mother's ear. George had been makingwild gestures to him, pointing first to Timmy, then to the telephone, where her aunt stood patientlylistening to old Mrs. Jones' gossipy talk.
'Oh - er - Mrs. Jones - there'll be a dog, too!' said her aunt. 'What - you've seven dogs already?
Good gracious! Oh, for the sheep, of course...'
'Seven dogs, Timmy!' said George, in a low voice to Tim, who wagged his tail at once. 'What do youthink of that? Seven! You'll have the time of your life!'
'Sh!' said Julian, seeing his mother glance crossly at George. He felt thankful that this unexpectedholiday had been so quickly fixed up. Like the others, he was beginning to feel very down and dull. Itwould be wonderful to go away. He wondered where their skis were...
6Everyone looked brighter when things had been settled. No school for some time! No lounging aboutthe house wishing something would happen! Timmy would be able to go for long walks at last. Theywould be on their own again, too, a thing the Five loved.
Jenkins was very helpful in looking out toboggans and skis. He brought them all into the house to beexamined and cleaned. Something exciting to do at last! Their exertions made them all cough badly,but they didn't mind so much now.
'Only two days to wait - then we're off!' said Dick. 'Ought we to take our skates, do you think?'
'No. Jenkins says there's no skating round about the farm,' said George. 'I asked him. I say - look atthat mound of woollen clothes your mother's just brought in, Ju! We might be going to the NorthPole!'
'Whew, Mother! If we wear all those, we'll never be able to ski!' said Julian. 'Gosh, look - six scarves!
Even if Timmy wears one, that's one too many.'
'One or two may get wet,' said his mother. 'It won't matter how many clothes you take - you're goingby car, and we can easily get everything in.'
'I'll take my field-glasses, too,' said Dick. 'You never know when they might be useful. George, oldthing, I do hope Timmy will be friends with the farm dogs. It would be awful if he quarrelled withthem - and he does sometimes get fierce with other dogs, you know - especially if we make a fuss ofthem!'
'He'll behave perfectly,' said George. 'And there's no need to make a fuss of other dogs if we've gotTimmy.'
'All right, teacher!' said Dick, and George stopped her polishing and threw her duster at him. Yes- certainly things were getting normal again!
When the time came for the children to set out on their journey they were feeling a good deal better -though their coughs were still almost as bad! 'I do hope you'll lose those awful coughs, Julian, beforeyou come back,' said his mother. 'It worries me to hear you all cough, cough, cough, day and night!'
'Poor old Mother - you have had a time!' said Julian, giving her a hug. 'You've been a brick.
What a sigh of relief you'll give when we're all safely away in the car!'
At last the car came, driving up the snowy path to the house. It was a hired car, a very big one, andthat was fortunate, as the children's luggage was truly colossal! The driver was a cheerful 7little man, and he and Jenkins soon had the suit-cases, toboggans, skis and all the rest either in theboot of the car, or strapped on top.
'There we are, Mam!' said the driver at last. 'Everything made fast. We're making a nice early start,and we should be safe in Magga Glen before it's dark.'
'We're all ready to start!' said Julian and the little man nodded and smiled, climbing into the driving-seat. Dick sat beside him, and the other three sat at the back, with Timmy on their feet.
Not that he would stay there long! He liked to look out of the window just as much as the childrendid!
Everyone heaved a sigh of relief as the car slid down the drive. They were off at last! Jenkins was atthe gate, and waved as they went past.
'Remember me to my old aunt now!' he shouted, as he shut the gate.
The driver was very chatty. He soon heard all about their miserable holidays, and how much theywere looking forward to their unexpected break before going back to school. In return he told themall about himself and his family - and as he had eleven brothers and sisters, his tale lasted for a goodpart of the journey!
They stopped for a meal in the car after some time, and found that they were hungry for the first timesince they had been ill.
'Good gracious - I can really taste these sandwiches!' said George, in a surprised voice. 'Can you,Anne?'
'Yes - they don't taste of cardboard - like all our meals have lately,' said Anne. 'Timmy - you're notgoing to fare so well, now that we're getting our appetites back!'
'He was a very good dustbin while we were ill, wasn't he?' said Dick. 'He simply gobbled up all thebits and pieces we couldn't eat. Ugh - that boiled fish! It tasted like stewed knitting!'
They laughed - and that set them off coughing again. The driver listened and shook his head.
'Nasty coughs you've got!' he said. 'Reminds me of the time when me and my family got whooping-cough - twelve of us together. My, when we all whooped, it sounded like a lot of fire-sirens goingoff!'
That made the children laugh again, and cough. But somehow nobody minded the irritating coughsnow - they would surely soon be gone, once they could get out into the country and try their legs atrunning and racing and skiing once again.
8It was a long drive. All the children fell asleep in the car after their meal, and the driver smiled to seethem lolling back against one another, looking very peaceful. Only Timmy was awake, and heclimbed cautiously up between George and the window, wishing the window was open, so that hecould put his big nose out into the wind, as he loved to do.
They stopped for a very early tea at a tea-shop in a village. 'Better stretch your legs a bit,' said thedriver, getting out. 'I know I want to stretch mine. Look - I'm going into that place over there for mytea. There's plenty of my pals there, and I'd enjoy a chat. You go and tuck in at this tea-shop here, andask for their buttered crumpets. Best in the kingdom they are! Be back for you in a quarter of an hour- not longer, or we shan't be at the farmhouse before dark. It's still about an hour's run, but there'll bea moon later on.'
They were all glad to stretch their legs. Timmy bounded out as if he were on springs, barking madly.
He was disappointed to find that they were only making a short stop - he had hoped they were at theend of their journey. But he was pleased to be given a buttery crumpet all to himself in the tea-shop.
He licked every scrap of butter off first, much to the children's amusement.
'I'd rather like to do that myself, Timmy,' said Anne. 'But it's not really good manners, you know!
Oh, don't make my shoe buttery - take your crumpet a bit farther away.'
They had time for two crumpets each, and a cup of hot tea. Julian bought some chocolate biscuits, ashe felt unexpectedly hungry, even after two crumpets.
'Marvellous to feel even a bit hungry, after not being able to look even bread and butter in the face!'
he said. 'I knew we must be jolly ill that day we couldn't eat even ice-cream though Mother tried totempt us with some!'
'My legs are still a bit funny,' said Anne, walking back to the car. 'But they're beginning to feel as ifthey belong to me, thank goodness!'
They set off again. They were in Wales now, and mountains were beginning to loom up in thedistance. It was a very clear evening, and although the mountains were white with snow, thecountryside they passed was not nearly as snowy as their own home had been when they left.
'I hope to goodness the snow doesn't begin to melt, just as we've arrived,' said Dick. 'It seems all rightup on the mountains at present - but down here in the valleys there's hardly any.'
They passed a sign-post, and Julian looked to see what it said. He made out a word that looked likeCymryhlli, and called to the driver.
'Did you see that sign-post? Should we look out for Magga Glen now?'
9'Yes. We must be getting on that way,' said the driver. 'I've been looking out for it myself. I wonder Ihaven't seen it yet.'
'Goodness! I hope we haven't lost our way,' said Anne. 'It will soon be dark.'
The car went on and on. 'Better look out for a village,' said Julian. But they didn't come to one -nor did they see any other sign-posts. The night was now coming on, but there was already a smallmoon, which gave a little light.
'Are you sure we're right?' Dick asked the driver. 'The road seems to be getting a bit rough - and wehaven't passed even a farmhouse for ages.'
'Well - maybe we are on the wrong road,' admitted the driver, slowing down. 'Though where we tookthe wrong turning I simply don't know! I reckon we're near the sea now.'
'Look - there's a turning up to the right!' shouted George, as they went slowly on. 'It's got a signpost,too!'
They stopped by the sign-post, which was only a small one. 'It doesn't say Magga Glen,' said Dick,disappointed. 'It says Old Towers - just that. Would it be the name of a place, do you think- or a building? Where's a map?'
The driver hadn't one. 'I don't usually need a map,' he said. 'But this here countryside isn't signpostedas it should be, and I wish I'd brought my route with me. I guess we'd better turn right and go up tosee this Old Towers. Maybe they can put us on our road!'
So they swung up to the right, and the car went slowly, crawling up a long, steep, winding road.
'It's quite a mountain,' said Anne, peering out of the window. 'Oh - I can see something - a buildingon the side of the hill, look - with towers. This must be it.'
They came to stout wooden gates. On them was a large notice, with just two words on it in largeblack letters:
KEEP OUT
'Well - that's nice and polite!' said the driver, angrily. 'Keep out! Why should we? Wait a bit -there's a little lodge here. I'll go and ask our way.'
But the lodge was no more helpful than the big gate. It was in complete darkness, and when thedriver banged on the door, there was no answer at all. Now what could they do?
2.去玛嘉峡谷
去玛嘉峡谷
一切都已经安排妥当，电话那头传来琼斯老太太的声音，听起来她似乎很期待这四个孩子的到来。
“夫人，我明白。不必太担心，他们的感冒一定会很快好起来的。对了夫人，我侄子詹金斯最近怎么样？他在工作上还令您满意吗？这孩子平时是粗野了一点，而且……”
“妈妈，告诉她我们还有一只狗。”朱利安在妈妈耳边小声说。
这多亏乔治提醒，就在朱利安妈妈站着跟琼斯太太闲聊的时候，乔治在旁边疯狂比画，先指了指蒂米，又指了指电话。
“啊，对了，琼斯太太，我们还有一只狗。”巴纳德太太说，“真的吗？您家养了七只狗呢！这太好了！哦，是牧羊犬，了解……”
“蒂米，那里还有七只狗！”乔治小声对蒂米说，它立刻乖巧地摇摇尾巴，“是不是很开心？七只呢！你有小伙伴陪你一起玩了！”
“嘘！”朱利安看到妈妈瞥了一眼乔治，赶紧打手势让大家安静。让他意想不到的是，假期转眼间便安排好了。刚开始，他和其他小伙伴一样，还有点失落郁闷，但现在一想到能外出度假、滑雪，心情一下子变得美妙起来！
当一切都准备就绪，孩子们个个看起来神采奕奕。不用上学！
也不用整日被困在房间里游走！每天可以期待些新鲜事，蒂米也可以在户外自由奔跑！最重要的是，大家最期待的，五个小伙伴又可以结伴而行了！
詹金斯帮大家搬来了雪橇和滑雪板，然后拿到房间里检查、清洗。终于有点事情做了，孩子们又激动又兴奋！但这一来一回的忙碌，又让他们剧烈咳嗽起来，不过谁也不在意了。
“再等两天，我们就能出发了！”迪克说，“我们应该带上溜冰鞋，你们觉得呢？”
“算了吧。我问过詹金斯，他说农场旁边没有溜冰场，”乔治说，“对了，朱利安，快看看那一堆羊毛衫，都是你妈妈刚刚拿进来的。我们又不是去北极！”
“哇，老妈！如果把这些套在身上，我们还怎么滑雪啊！”朱利安说，“天啊，还有六条围巾！就算蒂米围一条，那也还剩一条啊！”
“可能有一两条会被雪打湿，多拿点备用。”妈妈回答说，“无论多少也没关系呀，反正都是坐车去，带东西很方便的。”
“我要带上我的望远镜，”迪克说，“它肯定能在关键时刻派上用场。乔治，听好了，我希望蒂米能和农场里的狗狗们友好相处。如果它们一旦吵起来，或者它和其他狗撕咬起来，后果将不堪设想。
尤其在我们对其他狗表现得过分亲昵的时候……”
“它肯定会乖乖听话，”乔治说，“如果蒂米跟我们一起去，我们就不要对其他狗过于亲昵。”
“知道了，老师！”迪克回答道。乔治一听，停下了手里的活儿，把抹布朝迪克扔了过来。当然，很快一切便回归正常了！
当孩子们准备踏上旅程的时候，还是咳得厉害，但他们感觉身体已经好多了！“朱利安，希望你回来的时候，再也不咳嗽了。”妈妈说，“听你们整日整夜地咳咳咳，我还是很担心！”
“我的好妈妈，您就放心吧！”朱利安一边说，一边抱了抱妈妈，“我们一会儿就上车了，您也能如释重负，好好放松一下了！”
不一会儿，一辆汽车穿过满是白雪的道路，驶了进来。这是一辆租来的车，非常大，不过好在它非常大才装下了孩子们众多的行李！司机个子小小的，看上去挺友好，能说会道的。很快，他和詹金斯一起把行李箱、雪橇、滑雪板以及其他物品都运上了车，后备箱里、车身顶部都装得满满的。
“夫人，您来看看！”司机对妈妈说，“一切已准备就绪。这样我们能早点启程，争取在天黑之前赶到玛嘉峡谷。”
“我们都准备好了！”朱利安说道，小个子男人点头笑了笑，随后就坐上了驾驶座。迪克坐在副驾驶，其他三个坐后面，蒂米趴在他们脚边。不过，它肯定待不住！它喜欢像孩子们一样，伸出头看向窗外。
当小汽车慢慢向前行驶的时候，大家都松了一口气。终于出发了！詹金斯站在大门口，向他们挥手告别。
“记得代我向我姑姑问好！”就在快要关上大门的时候，他冲着汽车大喊了一句。
司机很健谈。很快，他在对话中了解了孩子们悲惨的假期，以及他们对这个意外之旅的满心期待，这是他们在开学之前最后的娱乐活动了。反过来，司机也介绍了他自己和他的家庭。他讲了自己的11个兄弟姐妹的故事，而这些故事也成了旅途的一部分。
行驶了一段时间后，大家安静下来了，开始吃起东西来，这是孩子们感冒以来第一次感受到饥饿。
“天啊，我竟然能尝出三明治的味道了！”乔治惊讶地说，“你呢，安妮？”
“我也是！再也不像前几天吃东西那样淡而无味了。”安妮回答，“蒂米，你的伙食水平得下降了，因为我们的胃口变好啦！”
“我们生病的时候，蒂米还真是一个给力的废物回收站呢！”迪克说，“它能吃下所有的剩菜剩饭。对了，还有那条清蒸鱼，尝起来简直就像清蒸编织袋！”
听完孩子们都笑了，这让他们又咳嗽起来。司机见此无奈地摇了摇头。“你们这咳嗽真够让人头疼的！”他说，“这让我想起了我们12个兄弟姐妹一起感冒咳嗽的日子。当我们全都咳起来的时候，那声音简直就像消防警报器一样此起彼伏！”
这不禁惹得孩子们又开怀大笑，不停咳嗽。但不知为何，再也没人介意这烦人的咳嗽声了。只要他们放飞自我到田野里去，恣意奔跑、嬉戏、滑雪，这咳嗽肯定很快就好了。
这段路程着实不短。孩子们吃完饭后陆陆续续都睡着了。看着他们一个个懒洋洋地靠着彼此，安然入睡，司机欣慰地笑了。这时候，只有蒂米还醒着，它小心翼翼地越过乔治，趴到了窗户边，可惜窗户紧闭，不然它就又能像往常一样，把它的大鼻子伸出窗外，感受风的抚摸。
随后，他们停在了一家茶餐厅旁边，想要提前喝个下午茶。“最好出去活动活动筋骨，”司机一边说，一边打开车门往外走，“反正我是得活动活动了。我要去那家店喝下午茶。我许多老朋友都在那儿，可能还会聊聊天。你们就在这家茶餐厅里，点些黄油松饼吃。
这家的黄油松饼可以说是我吃过的最好吃的了！大家15分钟后就回来，不能再拖了。要不然天黑之前我们可能都赶不到农场去！大约还有一个小时的路程，一会儿月亮就升起来了。”
一行人都欢欢喜喜地伸了个懒腰。蒂米像踩在泉水里一样，一蹦一跳地往前跑去，兴奋地大叫。但令它失望的是，孩子们只是在中途短暂停留，而不是抵达了终点。在茶餐厅里，孩子们给它点了一整块黄油松饼，这让它兴奋了好一会儿。它先把黄油舔得干干净净，又想舔干净孩子们手上的。
“蒂米，别别别，我自己来，”安妮说，“这可不是什么高雅举止哦！啊，别把黄油蹭到我鞋子上面，快把你的松饼拿远一点。”
每个人吃了两块松饼，外加一杯热茶。朱利安买了一些巧克力饼干，因为他即使吃了两块松饼还是很饿，这着实让人惊讶。
“尽管我把黄油松饼吃得干干净净，一点没剩，可还是感觉很饿，这太奇妙了！”朱利安说，“我想起来，在感冒最严重的那天，我们对最爱的冰激凌都失去了兴趣，尽管妈妈还试图诱惑我们吃一些！”
“我的腿还是有点沉，”安妮一边说，一边拖着身子走回汽车，“不过我也能真真切切有点知觉了，谢天谢地！”
他们又出发了。现在，他们抵达了威尔士，远方的山在晴朗的夜色里绵延起伏。尽管山上覆盖着皑皑白雪，但是他们经过的小山村却没什么积雪，有的甚至还没他们自己家的厚。
“真心祈祷在我们到达之前，雪都不要融化！”迪克说，“现在山上看起来一切正常，但是山谷里却没什么积雪。”
这时，他们路过了一个指示牌，朱利安仔细看了看。他试着读了一下，好像是叫“克米瑞山庄”，然后他问司机：“您看到那个指示牌了吗？我们现在是不是该留心一下玛嘉峡谷的指示牌？”
“是的，我们必须走那条路，”司机回答说，“我一直都在注意看，我想我应该是还没看见它。”
“天哪！我们不会迷路吧，”安妮说，“很快天就黑透了。”
汽车继续向前行驶。“最好也留意一下路边的村庄吧。”朱利安说。但是一路驶过，一间农舍都没有，更别说什么指示牌了。夜晚悄悄来临，天边早已升起了一轮小小的月亮，闪烁着点点亮光。
“您确定我们没走错？”迪克问司机，“道路似乎越来越颠簸，而且我们已经好久都没路过任何农舍了。”
“好吧，或许确实是走错路了。”司机放慢速度，承认道，“尽管我不知道我们是在哪里转错了弯，但我确信这个地方离大海不远。”
“看！前面有一条右转路！”汽车缓慢行驶的时候，乔治惊呼一叫，“那里也有一块指示牌！”
汽车停在了指示牌旁边，这块牌子很小很小。“上面写的不是玛嘉峡谷，”迪克失望地回答，“而是‘古塔’，就这两个字。应该是某个地方的名称吧，或者说某个建筑的名称。地图在哪儿？让我来瞧一瞧。”
司机没有地图，“通常我都不需要地图的，”他说，“但是村庄的指示牌也不该是这样子的，要是我知道路线该多好啊！我想我们还是去古塔瞧个究竟，或许有人能给我们指指路呢！”
于是他们向右驶去，汽车缓缓向前，在又长又陡的山路上蜿蜒前行。
“这是一座相当大的山呀，”安妮一边说，一边向窗户外看去，“我看见什么东西了——是山边的一座建筑，看着像是一座塔。
就在那里！”
他们来到木头做成的古塔大门前，上面刻了显眼的警示语，只有两个大大的黑字：
勿入
“好吧，他们可真是‘有礼貌’！”司机愤愤说道，“勿入！凭什么呀？大家等一等，那边有个小屋，我过去问问路。”
但是小屋也没有提供任何帮助，里面空空如也，漆黑一片。司机敲了敲门，没有任何回应。现在他们该怎么办呢？
Chapter 3 THE END OF THE JOURNEY
Chapter 3 THE END OF THE JOURNEY
'Well - we'd better turn round and go back down the hill,' said Dick, as the driver came back to thecar.
'No, wait, I'll just hop out and see if there are any lights anywhere,' said Julian, and jumped out of thecar. 'I could go up the drive a little way and see if I can spot the house itself. It can't be very far. Afterall, we spotted it just now as we came up the winding road.'
He went to the gates, and looked at them in the light from the car's headlamps. 'They're padlocked,'
he called. 'But I think I can climb over. There's certainly a light somewhere beyond -though how far, I don't know.'
But before he could climb over the gate there came the sound of running footsteps behind it - andthen a loud and savage howl came on the night air, and some animal hurled itself against the otherside of the gate.
The driver got back hurriedly into the car and slammed the door. Julian also ran to the car, finding hislegs could go quickly if he wanted them to, for all their feebleness!
Timmy began to bark fiercely, and tried to leap through the closed car-window. The howling andbarking behind the gates went on and on, and the dog there, which must have been a very big one,continually hurled itself against the gates, shaking them from top to bottom.
'Better turn round and go,' said the driver, scared.
'Whew! I'm glad I'm this side of those gates. What a din! That dog of yours is almost as bad, too!'
Timmy was certainly furious. Why wasn't he allowed to get out and tell the other dog what hethought of him? George tried to pacify him, but he wouldn't stop barking. The driver began to turnthe car round, cautiously backing a little and then going forward, and backing again. The road wasfairly wide, but there was a very steep slope to the right of the car. Old Towers was certainly built ona mountainside!
'The people there must be jolly scared of burglars to have a dog like that,' said Dick. 'Yet it's such alonely place you wouldn't think many people would come near it. What's up, driver?'
'There's something wrong,' said the driver, who now had the car facing back down the road again.
'The car seems very heavy to drive, all of a sudden. As if I'd got my brakes on.'
'Perhaps you have,' said Julian.
11
'Well, I haven't,' said the driver, shortly. 'That is, only just a little, to make sure the car doesn't shootoff down the hill - you can see it's pretty steep here, and there's almost a cliff, your side.
Don't want to drive down there in the dark! What can be the matter with the car? It will only crawl.'
'I thought it came up the hill terribly slowly, too,' said Dick. 'I know the road was steep and winding -but didn't it seem to you as if the car was making heavy work of it?'
'Well, yes, it did,' admitted the driver. 'But I just thought the hill must be steeper than I imagined.
What is the matter with the car? I've got no brake on at all, and I'm pushing the accelerator down hard- and still she crawls! As if she'd got a ton weight to pull!'
It really was a puzzle. Julian felt worried. He didn't want them to have to spend the night in the car,lost in a cold countryside - especially as now it was beginning to snow lightly! The moon haddisappeared behind heavy clouds, and everything looked very dark indeed.
They reached the bottom of the hill at last, and came on to the level road again. The driver heaved asigh of relief - and then gave a sudden exclamation.
'What's happened? The car's all right again! She's going like a bird! Whew - that's a load off mymind! I thought she was going to pack up, and leave us to spend the night here.'
The car sped along well now, and everyone was most relieved. 'Must have been something wrongwith her works somewhere,' said the driver. 'But I'm blessed if I know what it was! Now -look out for a house or a signpost.'
They actually came to a sign-post not long after that, and George yelled out at once. 'Stop! Here's asignpost. STOP!'
The car slid to a stop beside it, and everyone looked at it and gave a shout of delight. 'Magga Glen!
Hurrah!'
'Up to the left,' said the driver, and swung his car into the lane. It was rather rough, and obviouslyonly a farm-road - but there, right up the hill they were now climbing, was a house, with lightsshining in the windows. That must be old Mrs. Jones' farmhouse.
'Thank goodness!' said Julian. 'This must be it. I'm glad we got here before the snow set in properly.
It's quite difficult to see through the windscreen now.'
Yes - it was the farmhouse. Dogs set up a terrific barking as the car drew near, and Timmy at onceanswered, almost deafening everyone in the car!
12
The driver drew up at the farmhouse door, and looked out cautiously to make sure that none of thebarking dogs was leaping about round the car. The front door opened, and framed in the light stood alittle old woman, as upright as any of the children!
'Come you in, come you in!' she called. 'Out of this cold and snow! Our Morgan will help with theluggage. Come you in, now!'
The four children, suddenly feeling very tired, got out of the car. Anne almost stumbled, becauseonce again her legs felt as if they didn't belong to her, and Julian caught her arm. They went inwearily, only Timmy seeming to have any energy! A tall man hurried out to help the driver with theluggage, saluting them as he passed.
The old lady took them into a big warm living-room and made them sit down. 'What a journey foryou!' she said. 'You look worn out and poorly. It's late you are, too, and I'd a good tea laid for you.
But now it's supper you'll be wanting, poor children!'
Julian caught sight of a loaded table not far from the fire, set to one side. Although he was tired, thesight of the good food there made him suddenly feel hungry. He smiled at the kind old woman. Herhair gleamed like silver, and her fine old face was wrinkled all over - but her eyes were as sharp andbright as a blackbird's.
'I'm sorry we're so late,' he said. 'We lost our way. This is my sister Anne - this is our cousin George -and this is my brother Dick.'
'And this is Timmy,' said George, and Timmy at once offered his paw to the old woman.
'Well, now, it's a wonder to see a dog with such good manners,' she said. 'We've seven - but not oneof them would shake hands - no, not if the Queen herself came here, God bless her!'
The barking of the dogs had now died down. Not one of them was to be seen in the house, and thechildren thought they must be outside in kennels somewhere.
Timmy trotted about round the room, sniffing into every corner with much interest. Finally he went tothe table, put his paws up and had a good look at the food there. Then he went to George and whined.
'He says he likes the look of the food there,' George said to the old woman. 'I must say I agree withhim! It looks good!'
'You go and wash and get yourselves a bit tidy, while I make some hot tea,' said Mrs. Jones. 'Youlook cold and hungry. Go through that door, look - and up the little flight of stairs. The rooms upthere are all yours - no one will disturb you.'
13
The Five went out of the door and found themselves in a little stone passage, lighted by a candle.
A narrow flight of stone steps led upwards to a small landing on which another candle burned.
The steps were very steep, and the children stumbled up them, their legs stiff after their long drive.
Two bedrooms opened off the little landing, opposite to one another. They seemed exactly alike, andwere furnished in the same way too. There were wash-stances with basins, and in each basin was ajug of hot water, wrapped around with a towel. Wood-fires burned in the little stone fireplaces, theirflames lighting the rooms almost more than the single candles there.
'You'll have this room, girls, and Dick and I will have the other,' said Julian. 'Gosh - wood-fires in ourbedrooms! What a treat!'
'I shall go to bed early, and lie and watch the flames,' said Anne. 'I'm glad the rooms aren't cold. Iknow I should cough if they were.'
'We haven't coughed quite so much today,' said Dick, and immediately, of course, had a very bad fitof coughing! The old woman downstairs heard him, and called up at once.
'You hurry up, now, and come down into the warm!'
They were soon downstairs, sitting in the warm living-room. Nobody was there except old Mrs.
Jones, pouring out tea.
'Isn't anyone else coming in to tea?' asked George, looking all round. 'Surely all this food isn't just forus?'
'Oh yes it is,' said the old woman, cutting some ham in long thin slices. 'This is your own room -the room I let out to families for themselves. We've got our big kitchen yonder for ourselves.
You can do what you like here - make as much noise as it pleases you - no one will hear you -our stone walls are so thick!'
After she had served them, she went out of the room, nodding and smiling. The children looked atone another.
'I like her very much,' said Anne. 'How old she must be, if she is Jenkins' aunt! But her eyes are sobright and young!'
'I feel better already,' said Dick, tucking into the ham. 'George, give Timmy something. He keepspoking me with his paw, and I really can't spare him any of my ham.'
'He can have some of mine,' said George. 'I thought I was hungry - but I'm not, after all. I suddenlyfeel tired.'
14
Julian looked at her. She did look tired, and her eyes were ringed with black shadows. 'Finish yourmeal, old thing,' said Julian, 'and go up to bed. You can unpack tomorrow. You're tired out with thelong drive! Anne doesn't look nearly so tired as you do!'
Old Mrs. Jones came in again, and approved highly of Julian's idea that they should all go up to bedwhen they had finished. 'Get up tomorrow when you like,' she said. 'And just come into my kitchenand tell me when you're down. You can do just what you like here!'
But all they wanted to do at that moment was to get into bed and go to sleep by the light of thecrackling wood-fires! What a relief it was to slip in between the rather rough sheets and shut theireyes! All except Timmy. He kept guard by the door for a long long time before he crept on toGeorge's bed. Good old Timmy!
3.终点
终点
“好吧，我们还是调头下山吧。”迪克见司机回到车上，便对他说。
“等一下，我出去看一下有没有其他地方亮着灯，”朱利安一边说一边打开车门跳了下去，“我可以稍微走远一点，看看能不能发现那座房子。肯定离得不远，毕竟我们刚刚在盘山路上就已经看见它了。”
他走到大门前，借着车灯仔细查看了一番，“门锁上了，”他说，“但我可以爬过去，里面某个地方肯定亮着灯，虽然我不知道隔了多远。”
就在他准备爬进去之前，大门里传来了一阵急匆匆的跑步声，然后一声响亮又野蛮的号叫震慑夜空，一些动物在猛力撞门，仿佛要冲破它似的。
司机见状赶紧回到车上，关好了门。朱利安转身拔腿就跑，发现自己的双腿在保命时刻可是飞一般的快呢，哪还管自己在不在病中。
蒂米开始狂吠，还试着从紧闭的窗户里跳出去。大门背后，怒嚎和犬吠还在继续。想必里面肯定有只大狗，它还在用力撞门，弄得整个大门都摇摇晃晃。
“我们最好赶紧离开这里，”司机完全给吓坏了，一脸惊恐地说，“呼！幸好我在大门的这一边。简直吓死人了！你们的狗也得好好管管！”
蒂米正十分暴怒：“为什么不放我下去和里面的狗打一架呢？”乔治试着安抚它，但蒂米丝毫没有要停下的意思。司机开始调头，小心翼翼地退一点进一点，然后又退一点。道路很宽，但是车身右边有一个十分陡峭的斜坡。古塔确实是建在峭壁边上的！
“那里的人肯定很害怕窃贼，所以才养了这么凶恶的狗，”迪克说，“但是这个地方看起来十分冷清，人迹罕至呀。这是怎么回事？”
“不对劲啊，”司机一边回答，一边把车调整到正对下山的路上，“这车怎么突然变得这么慢，跟踩了刹车似的。”
“或许你真踩了呢。”朱利安说。
“不，我没有，”司机笃定，“我只是踩了一点点，为了防止汽车滑下山去。你们也能看见这里这么陡，旁边几乎就是悬崖。在黑暗中开车下山，真是太难了！不过这车到底是怎么了呢？现在只能龟速爬行。”
“我觉得它上山好像也这么慢，”迪克说，“我知道这条路蜿蜒陡峭，但您不觉得这车现在好像寸步难行吗？”
“是啊，”司机承认道，“我觉得这条路比我想象中的更为陡峭一些。这车到底是怎么了？我现在完全没踩刹车，还把油门踩到了底，但它还是这么慢！就好像在拉一吨重的东西。”
这太诡异了。朱利安感到十分不安。他可不想让自己的弟弟妹妹们在这个寒冷乡村迷路，在车上过夜。尤其现在又淅淅沥沥下起了小雪！月亮躲到厚厚的云层后面去了，周围一片乌黑。
庆幸的是，他们最终安全抵达山脚，回到了平坦大道。司机深舒了一口气，然后突然感叹道：
“奇了怪了？车子恢复正常了！现在可以像小鸟一样飞速前行了！唉，可让我悬着的心放下了！还以为它罢工不干，让我们在这边睡上一宿呢。”
汽车现在行驶地十分顺畅，所有人都松了一口气。“肯定还是车子出了故障，”司机说，“要是我知道是什么问题就好了！现在，大家打起精神来，注意观察两边有没有农舍或者指示牌。”
过了没多久，他们就看到了一个指示牌，乔治立刻大喊道：“停一下！我看到指示牌了！停车！”
于是，汽车停到了指示牌旁边，所有人都凑过去看，然后一齐惊呼：“玛嘉峡谷！哦耶！”
“向左走。”司机一边说，一边向左驶去。但是这路更颠簸了，很明显这是一条乡村土路。行驶在小路上，远远就看见山丘上耸立着一间房屋，房子的窗户里透出些灯光。那一定是琼斯太太的农庄了！
“谢天谢地！”朱利安说，“那肯定是了！很开心我们能在鹅毛大雪来临之前，顺利赶到目的地。现在挡风玻璃已经被雪覆盖了大半，很难看清外面了。”
是的，终于到目的地了！当汽车驶近时，农庄里传出来一阵阵可怕的狗叫，蒂米也不甘示弱，立刻回应，叫声简直震耳欲聋！
司机把车开到农庄门前，小心谨慎地观察四周，以确保没有狗围在车子旁。房门打开了，一位老妇人站在微弱的灯光底下，脸上泛着和孩子们一样的喜悦表情。
“快进来，快进来！”她大声说，“外面下雪太冷了！摩根会帮忙抬行李的。大家快进来！”
四个孩子一下车，疲惫感突然席卷而来。安妮差点打滑摔倒，因为她的腿好像又不听使唤了，好在朱利安顺手抓住了她的胳膊。
他们满脸疲倦，拖着身子进了屋，只有蒂米还活蹦乱跳。一个高个子男人急匆匆地出来，准备帮司机搬运行李，经过孩子们的时候，有礼貌地向孩子们挥手致意。
老太太把孩子们领到温暖的大客厅里，安排孩子们乖乖坐下。“一路上肯定累坏了吧！”她说，“个个看起来都没精打采的，而且这么晚才到。本来为你们准备了一壶好茶，但我想你们现在肯定饿了，可怜的孩子们！”
朱利安看到在壁炉不远处，放置了一张餐桌，上面摆满了各种各样的食物。尽管他浑身疲惫，但看到这么多美味，饿意突然袭来了。他冲着老太太笑了笑。在火光的照耀下，老太太的头发闪耀着银色的光。尽管她已经满脸皱纹，但她的双眼就像老鹰一样锐利明亮。
“很抱歉我们迟到了，”他解释道，“我们在路上迷路了。这是我妹妹安妮，这是我堂妹乔治，这是我弟弟迪克。”
“还有，这是蒂米。”乔治补充说，蒂米立刻朝着老太太，乖乖地伸出了自己的爪子。
“哇，现在很少能看到这么有礼貌的狗了，”老太太说，“我们养了七只，但没有一只会伸出爪子和人握手。就算女王来了也很难说！”
狗叫声终于停息了。但是房间里一只狗的影子也没有，孩子们想它们肯定在外面的狗窝里待着。
蒂米高兴地在房间里乱窜，闻闻这里，嗅嗅那里，不放过任何一个角落。最后，它来到餐桌旁边，伸出爪子搭在桌边，眼巴巴地盯着桌上的美味，然后蹿到乔治旁，开始摇尾乞怜。
“它说它很喜欢这些食物，”乔治对老妇人说，“我举双手赞同！
看着就让人流口水了！”
“你们都去洗一洗，把自己弄精神点，我再去弄点热茶来，”琼斯太太说，“你们肯定又冷又饿吧。穿过那扇门，就能看见一小段楼梯，楼梯上面的房间都是给你们准备的！没人会打扰你们。”
五个小伙伴穿过那扇门，来到了一个石头通道前，墙上点着一根蜡烛用来照明。狭窄的石阶通往楼上的一个平台，那里点着另一根蜡烛。阶梯很陡，孩子们吃力地往上爬，长途奔波使他们的双腿都麻木了。
两间卧室相互正对，门都半掩着。两间房看起来简直一模一样，装修布置完全一样。洗漱间有浴盆，每个浴盆里都放了一壶热水，壶身用毛巾裹着。木柴在壁炉里烧得正旺，火焰照亮了整个房间，比蜡烛管用多了。
“女孩们睡这个房间，我和迪克去对面那间，”朱利安说，“天啊！房间里竟然有壁炉，我们真是受到了盛情款待啊！”
“我想早点休息，想躺在床上看柴火燃烧，”安妮说，“房间里这么暖和，真的太好了。如果太冷的话，我一定会咳嗽的。”
“我们今天消停很多了。”迪克说。结果，话音刚落，他就重重地咳了一声。老妇人在楼底下听见，就立刻喊起来：“你们手脚利索点，收拾完就赶紧下来烤火！”
很快，他们收拾完就下了楼，齐刷刷地坐在温暖的客厅里。客厅里只有琼斯太太，她给每个孩子都倒上了热茶。
“没有其他人来喝茶了吗？”乔治环顾四周，好奇地问，“难道这些食物都是为我们准备的？”
“是的，”老妇人一边回答，一边把火腿切成薄片，“这是属于你们的房子了，它是我专门空出来为家人到访准备的。这个房子里有一间大厨房。你们在这里可以随心所欲，发出多大的噪音都没关系，只要你们自己乐意。而且没人会听见，石头砌的墙可厚着呢！”
把孩子们安顿好之后，她朝孩子们点点头微微笑，便离开了房间，只剩下孩子们面面相觑。
“我很喜欢她，”安妮说，“她是詹金斯的姑姑，年纪肯定不小了！但是她的双眼却炯炯有神、清澈雪亮！”
“我感觉自己好多了，”迪克一边说，一边往嘴里塞了一叠火腿，“乔治，拿点东西给蒂米吃，它一直用爪子戳我，但我自己都吃不够呢。”
“我分一些给它吃，”乔治说，“我以为我饿了，但其实还好。我只是突然觉得累了。”
朱利安看了看她，确实挺憔悴的，眼睛四周覆盖了浓浓的黑眼圈。“小子，先吃完饭，”朱利安说，“然后就去睡觉。你可以明天再整理行李。经不起长途车的折磨了吧？安妮看起来都没你那么疲惫！”
琼斯太太又进来了，十分赞同朱利安的想法。吃完东西，孩子们确实该上床睡觉了。“明天睡到自然醒吧，”她说，“下楼了就来找我，告诉我想吃什么。在这里，你们可以自由自在，做想做的事！”
但在那一刻，他们最想做的还是在噼啪作响的火焰旁，上床睡觉。孩子们闭上双眼，窝在暖和的被子里安然入梦，洗去一天的疲惫。唯独蒂米与众不同，它在门口守了好长一段时间，然后才悄悄爬上了乔治的床尾。蒂米是个很棒的守护者！
Chapter 4 IN THE OLD FARMHOUSE
Chapter 4 IN THE OLD FARMHOUSE
The four children slept like logs all night long. If they coughed they didn't know it! They lay in theirbeds, hardly moving - and only Timmy opened an eye occasionally, as he always did on the firstnight in a strange place.
He jumped when a burning log fell to one side in the fireplace. He stared sternly at a big bright flamelicking up the chimney, as the log burned fiercely. He cocked up an ear when an owl hooted outsidethe window.
But at last he too fell asleep, lying as usual on George's feet - though old Mrs. Jones would not haveapproved of that at all!
Julian awoke first in the morning. He heard the sounds of the farm coming through the closedwindow. Shouts of one man to another - the lowing of cows - the barking of one dog after another,and then all together - and the peaceful sound of hens clucking and ducks quacking. It was nice to lieand hear it all, feeling warm and lazy.
He looked at his watch. Good gracious, it was almost nine o'clock! Whatever would Mrs. Jones thinkof them? He leapt out of bed, and awoke Dick with the quick movement.
'It's almost nine!' said Julian, and went to the washstand. This time there was only cold water in thebig china jug, but he didn't mind. The bedroom was still warm with the burnt-out wood-fires.
15
The sun shone outside, but in the night the snow must have fallen heavily, for everywhere was white.
'Good,' said Julian, looking out. 'We shall be able to use our toboggans soon. Wake the girls, Dick.'
But the girls were already awake, for Timmy had heard the boys stirring, and had gone whining tothe door. George stretched herself, feeling quite different from the night before.
'Anne - how do you feel? I feel really fine!' said George, pleased. 'Do you know it's nine o'clock?
We've slept for more than twelve hours. No wonder we feel better!'
'Yes. I certainly do too,' said Anne, with an enormous yawn. 'Oh look, I've made Timmy yawn too!
Timmy, did you sleep well?'
'Woof!' said Timmy, and pawed impatiently at the door. 'He wants his breakfast,' said George. 'Iwonder what there is. I feel rather like bacon and egg - goodness, I thought I'd never feel like eatingthat again. Brrrr - this water's cold to wash in.'
They all went downstairs together and found their living-room warm with a great wood-fire.
Breakfast was laid, but only a big crusty loaf, butter and home-made marmalade were there, with anenormous jug of cold, creamy milk.
Mrs. Jones came in almost at once, beaming at them. 'Well, good morning to you now,' she said,'and a nice morning it is too, for all the snow we had in the night. What would you be wanting forbreakfast now? Ham and eggs - or home-made pork sausages - or meat patties - or...'
'I'd like ham and eggs,' said Julian, at once, and the others said the same. Mrs. Jones went out of theroom, and the children rubbed their hands.
'I feared we were only going to have bread and butter and marmalade,' said Dick. 'I say, look at thecream on the top of this milk! Me for a farm life when I grow up!'
'Woof!' said Timmy, approvingly. He kept hearing the other dogs barking, and going to the windowto look out. George laughed at him. 'You'll have to remember you're just a visitor, when you meetthose dogs,' she said. 'No throwing your weight about, and barking your head off!'
'They look pretty big dogs,' said Dick, joining Timmy at the window. 'Welsh collies, I should think -they're so good with the sheep. I say - I wonder what that dog was that barked at us so fiercely lastnight, behind that gate at Old Towers? Do you remember?'
'Yes. I didn't much like it,' said Anne. 'It was rather like a nasty dream - losing our way - going upthat steep hill - only to find that horrid notice on the gates - and nobody to ask the way - and 16then that hidden dog barking ferociously just the other side of the gates! And then the car crawlingdown the hill in that strange way.'
'Yes. It was a bit queer,' said Dick. 'Ah - here comes our breakfast. Mrs. Jones, you've brought inenough for eight people, not four!'
She was followed by an enormous man, with a mass of black hair, bright blue eyes, and a sternmouth.
'This is my son Morgan,' she said. The four children looked at the giant like man in awe.
'Good morning,' said Julian and Dick together, and Morgan nodded his head, after giving them onequick look. The girls gave him polite smiles, and he nodded at them too, but didn't speak a word. Hewent out at once.
'He's not much of a one for talking,' said the old woman. 'Not my Morgan. But the voice he's gotwhen he's angry! I'm telling the truth when I say you could hear him a mile away! Sends the sheepskittering off for miles when he shouts!'
Julian felt that he could quite believe it. 'Those are his dogs you can hear barking,' said the oldwoman. 'Three of them. They go about with my Morgan everywhere. He's all for dogs, he is.
Doesn't care much about people! He's got four more dogs on the hills with the sheep - and, believeyou me, if Morgan went out in the yard there, and shouted, those four dogs away with the sheep onthe hills far yonder would hear him and come tearing down here like a flash of lightning!'
The children felt as if they could well believe this of the giant like Morgan. They rather wished hewould call his dogs. His voice would certainly be worth hearing!
They set to work on their breakfast, and although they couldn't eat quite all that Mrs. Jones hadbrought, they managed to do very well indeed! So did Timmy. They especially liked the bread, whichwas home-made and very good.
'I could really make a meal just of this home-made bread and fresh butter,' said Anne. 'Our bread athome doesn't taste a bit the same. I say - wouldn't Mother be amazed to see the breakfast we've eatentoday?'
'She certainly would - considering that we haven't felt like eating even a boiled egg for days,'
said Dick. 'I say - oughtn't we to telephone home, Julian, and say we're safely here?'
'Gosh, yes,' said Julian. 'I meant to last night. I'll do that now, if Mrs. Jones will let me. Hallo, look -isn't that our last night's driver going off? He must have spent the night here.'
17
The driver was about to get into his car when he heard Julian knocking at the window. He came overto the farmhouse, and walked in at the front door, and soon found the children's living-room.
'I'm just off,' he announced. 'The old lady gave me a bed in the barn last night - never been so cosy inmy life! And I say - I've found out why the car crawled so slowly up and down that hill to OldTowers last night!'
'Oh, have you? Why was it then?' asked Julian, with interest.
'Well, it wasn't anything to do with the car,' said the driver, 'and wasn't I thankful to know that! It wasto do with the hill itself.'
'Whatever do you mean?' said Dick, puzzled.
'Well, the shepherd's wife told me they think there must be something magnetic down under that hill,'
said the driver. 'Because when the postman goes up on his bicycle, the same thing happens.
His bicycle feels like lead, so heavy that he can't even cycle up - and if he pushes his bike, it feels justas heavy too. So now he leaves his bike at the bottom and just walks up!'
'I see - so the magnetic whatever-it-is got hold of the car last night, and pulled so much that it made itgo slow too,' said Julian. 'Queer! There must be some deposit of powerful metal in that hill. Does itaffect all cars like that?'
'Oh yes - no one goes up there in a car if they can help it,' said the driver. 'Funny thing, isn't it?
Queer hill altogether, if you ask me - that notice on the gate and all!'
'I wonder who lives there?' said Dick.
'Only an old dame,' said the driver. 'She's off her head, so they say - won't let anyone in! Well -we know that all right. Sorry I lost my way last night - but you're all right now. You're in cloverhere!'
He moved to the door, raised his hand in salute, and went out. They saw him through the windowgetting into his car and driving away, waving a leather-gloved hand out of the window.
'Is the snow thick enough to toboggan on?' wondered George. 'It doesn't look like it. Let's go out andsee. Better wrap up well, though - I bet the wind's cold out on this hill, and I don't want to startsniffing again. I've had enough of that.'
Soon they were all clad in heavy coats, scarves and woollen hats. Mrs. Jones nodded her head whenshe saw them, and smiled. 'Sensible children you are,' she said. 'Cold it is today, with a 18biting wind, but healthy weather! Be careful of that dog of yours, my boy - don't you let him loose tillyou're well away from the farm, in case he goes for one of my Morgan's dogs.'
George smiled, pleased to be addressed as a boy. They began to wander round the farm, Timmy crossbecause he was on the lead. He pulled at it, wanting to run round and explore on his own.
But George wouldn't let him. 'Not till you've made friends with all the other dogs,' she said. 'I wonderwhere they are?'
'Must have gone out with Morgan,' said Dick. 'Come on - let's go and look at the cows in the sheds. Ido love the smell of cows.'
They wandered round the farm, enjoying the pale sun, the keen wind, and the feeling that their legsbelonged to them at last, and were not likely to give way at any moment. They hardly coughed at all,and felt quite aggrieved when one or other suddenly began.
'I shall let old Timmy off the lead a bit now,' said George. 'I can't see a dog about anywhere.' So sheslipped the lead off his collar and he ran off joyfully at once, sniffing here, there and everywhere. Hedisappeared round a corner, his tongue hanging out happily.
And then the most appalling barking began! The children stopped as if they had been shot. It wasn'tone dog, or even two - it sounded like a dozen! The four rushed round the corner of a barn at once -and there was poor Timmy, standing with his back to the barn, growling and barking and snarling atthree fierce dogs!
'No, George, no, don't go to Timmy,' shouted Julian, seeing that George was going to rescue Tim,whatever happened. 'Those dogs are savage!'
But what did George care for that? She raced to Timmy, stood in front of him, and yelled at the threesurprised dogs snarling there. 'HOW DARE YOU! GET AWAY! GO HOME! I SAID GOHOME!'
4.农场惊魂
农场惊魂
整个夜晚，孩子们睡得可沉了。他们在床上躺着一动也不动，要是谁咳嗽了，肯定也察觉不了。只有蒂米不时睁开眼睛，因为每到一个陌生的环境里，它总是如此。
火炉里的木柴烧得“哔啵”响，一根柴火被崩到了壁炉的另一侧，吓得蒂米站了起来。炉子里的火生得旺盛，它盯着那团火花，看火花舔舐炉壁。窗外一只猫头鹰叫了一声，蒂米立刻警觉地竖起了耳朵。但最后，它也睡着了，像往常一样躺在乔治的脚边美美地睡去，尽管琼斯太太可能不允许这样做。
第二天早上，朱利安第一个醒来。尽管窗户紧闭，但他还是听见了农场传来的热闹声。人的叫喊声、牛叫声、犬吠声，所有声音都杂糅在一起，其中还掺杂了母鸡“咯咯”、鸭子“嘎嘎”的声音。就这样躺着聆听所有的声音，真是惬意极了。
朱利安看了看手表！天啊，都九点了！琼斯太太会怎么想他们啊？他赶紧从床上跳起来，以最快的动作摇醒了迪克。
“快，九点了！”朱利安一边说，一边往洗漱间跑。现在，那个大搪瓷水壶里只剩下冰水了，但朱利安也不在意。壁炉里火还在燃烧，整个房间一如既往地温暖。尽管窗外阳光普照，但昨天晚上肯定下了鹅毛大雪，因为外面一片银装素裹。
“太好了，”朱利安远眺望去，说道，“我们的雪橇很快就能派上用场了。迪克，去叫醒女孩们。”
但女孩们早就醒了，蒂米老远就听见男孩们的躁动声，把房门弄得嘎吱作响。乔治伸了个懒腰，感觉精神状态比昨晚好多了。
“安妮，你好些了吗？我感觉棒极了！”乔治开心地说，“你知道吗，现在已经九点了！我们睡了十二个多小时了。也难怪我感觉很棒！”
“是的。我也感觉好多了，”安妮一边说，一边打了一个巨大的哈欠，“快看，蒂米跟着我一起打哈欠了！蒂米，昨晚你睡得好吗？”
“汪！”蒂米回答，一边用爪子不耐烦地挠门。“它想吃早餐，”乔治说，“我想知道早餐是什么。我现在特别想吃培根和鸡蛋。天啊，我以为我再也不想吃这两样东西了！嘶……这水也太冰了。”
不一会儿，小伙伴们一起下了楼，走到客厅发现壁炉里的柴火正熊熊燃烧，整个屋子都暖洋洋的。早餐已经摆好了，但只有一整个的长条硬面包、些许黄油及自制果酱，旁边还放了一罐冷牛奶。
琼斯太太听见动静，马上赶了过来，笑容满面地和大家打招呼，“早上好啊，孩子们，”她说，“真是一个美好的早晨呀，昨晚下了一夜的雪呢。早餐想吃什么呀？火腿和鸡蛋？自制猪肉香肠？肉饼？还是……”
“我想吃火腿和鸡蛋。”朱利安说，其他孩子也跟着要了同样的东西。随后，琼斯太太离开了客厅，孩子们迫不及待地搓搓手。
“我还以为我们只有面包、黄油、果酱三种选择呢，”迪克说，“你们快瞧那牛奶上面的奶油！我们终于有机会来体验农家生活了！”
“汪！”蒂米叫了一声，以示赞同。它不停地听到外面传来的狗叫声，便跑到窗户边朝外看。乔治笑着说：“当遇到其他狗时，你得时刻记着你是个客人，不能仗势欺‘狗’，更不能乱吼乱叫到处撒野。”
“这些狗看上去个头很大，”迪克也挪到窗户边朝外看，说道，“威尔士牧羊犬！我想它们和羊群相处肯定十分融洽。不过我很好奇昨晚在古塔大门里面，对我们怒吼的那只狗是什么品种。你们还有印象吗？”
“当然有印象。我可不喜欢它。”安妮说，“昨晚真像是做了一个噩梦：先是迷了路，然后爬上了峭壁，结果看到门口那张吓人的警告，周围阴森可怕，一个人都没有，还被大门里疯狂咆哮的狗吓得半死！最后下山还发生如此奇怪的事。”
“确实很奇怪，”迪克说，“啊，我们的早餐来了。琼斯太太，您拿了八个人的份，我们四个吃不了这么多！”
琼斯太太后面跟了一个大个子男人，他长了一头乌黑的头发，一双明亮的蓝眼睛，双唇紧闭，一言不发。
“这是摩根，我的儿子。”她说。孩子们抬起头敬畏地看向这个巨人。
“早上好，”朱利安和迪克齐声说。摩根瞥了他们一眼，点了点头。女孩们向他致以礼貌的微笑，他也朝女孩们点了点头。但终究一句话都没说，转身就出去了。
“他不善言谈，”老妇人说，“我们家摩根就是这样。但是他一生气就会说话了。毫不夸张地说，他一张嘴，就算一英里之外都能听见！如果把羊群赶到几英里外，羊群乱跑的时候，他就会大吼。”
听完，朱利安对此深信不疑。“那些正在怒吼的狗都是他的，”老妇人继续说道，“其中三只跟摩根简直形影不离，摩根去哪儿，它们就跟着去哪儿。他的心思都在狗身上，不怎么和人打交道！山上还有四只狗，用来看管山羊。相信我，如果摩根在院子里大吼一声，那山上的四只狗肯定能听见，然后以闪电般的速度冲到下面来。”
孩子们对巨人摩根的故事坚信不疑，他们十分期待摩根能叫一叫他自己的狗，他的声音肯定很值得一听！
随后，他们开始吃早餐，尽管吃不完琼斯太太拿过来的所有食物，他们还是很努力地吃了一大半！蒂米也是。他们尤其喜欢吃自制的面包，品质优良，口感极好。
“光是自制面包和黄油，我就已经很饱了，”安妮说，“我们在家吃的面包和这个真的无法相提并论。要是妈妈看见我们今天的早餐吃得这么丰盛，肯定会大吃一惊！”
“肯定的！毕竟我们已经好久没有胃口了，连煮鸡蛋都吃不下，”迪克说，“对了，朱利安，我们是不是应该给家里打个电话报个平安？”
“嗯！是的！”朱利安说，“本来是计划昨晚打的。如果琼斯太太准许的话，我现在就给妈妈打电话。快看，这是昨晚送我们来的司机吗，他是要走了吗？看来他也在这里留宿了。”
司机正准备上车，突然听到了朱利安敲打窗户的声音。他来到农庄前，走了进来，然后在客厅里看到了孩子们。
“我要走了，”他告诉孩子们，“昨晚这位好心的太太临时在谷仓里给我铺了一张床，这一晚睡得舒服极了。而且，我已经弄清楚汽车在古塔行驶如此慢的原因了！”
“真的吗？原因是什么呢？”朱利安饶有兴致地问。
“事实上，并不是车本身出了什么毛病，”司机说，“还好不是车的问题！而是这座山本身有问题。”
“什么意思？”迪克一脸困惑。
“牧羊人的妻子告诉我，这里的人们都认为那座山底下有不少磁铁矿。”司机说，“因为这儿的邮差骑自行车上山，也会发生同样的事情。他的自行车就如同灌了铅一样重，根本无法滚动，就算邮差下车去推，自行车还是一样寸步难行。所以现在，他都是把自行车停在山脚，然后徒步上山！”
“我懂了！所以是山里的磁铁矿牵制了小汽车，才让汽车行驶得如此之慢，”朱利安说，“真神奇！那座山里肯定埋藏着许多金属矿藏。是不是所有上山的车都会受影响呢？”
“是的！如果能走上去，没有人会选择开车，”司机说，“真是奇闻趣事啊！整座山都很奇怪！别忘了大门口张贴的警告和在那里发生的一切！”
“我很好奇谁住在里面？”迪克说。
“只有一个老妇人，”司机说，“大家都说她疯了，所以不让任何人进入！我们自己心知肚明就好了。很抱歉昨晚迷了路，好在大家现在都平平安安的。大家在这里好好修养吧！”
他走到门口，对孩子们挥手致意，然后离开了。孩子们透过窗户看见他上了车，车子驶向远方。他还不忘将手伸出车窗外，握着橡胶手套和孩子们挥手告别。
“雪够厚吗？可以玩雪橇吗？”乔治问大伙儿，“看起来不够厚，我们出去瞧瞧。最好捂得严实点，我敢打赌这山上肯定寒风凛冽，我可不想又流鼻涕，我早就受够了。”
很快，他们都裹上了厚实的外套、围巾、羊毛帽。琼斯太太看见孩子们的时候，满意地点点头，微笑着说：“真是懂事的孩子。今天有点冷，还吹着寒风，不过好在还有点太阳，天气晴朗！小子，要留意你的狗，千万看紧了，一定要拴好。出了农场走得远远的，才能松开狗链子，以防它和摩根的狗打起来。”
乔治笑了一下，很高兴自己被当作是男孩。他们在农场周围转悠，因为拴了狗链，蒂米只能跟在后面。它使劲地扯了扯，想跑开自己玩。但是乔治没有松手：“你得先跟其他狗交了朋友，才能自由活动。但我不知道它们在哪儿？”
“一定是和摩根一起出去了，”迪克说，“走，我们去看看牛棚里的奶牛，我可喜欢牛的味道了。”
孩子们漫步在农场四周，享受着冬日残存的日光，热情的寒风，以及找回双腿的快感。他们再也不担心会半途退缩了。孩子们几乎都不咳嗽了，他们中如果有谁突然咳嗽起来，大家反而投以同情的目光。
“我解开链子，让蒂米自己玩一会儿，”乔治说，“周围一只狗的影子都没有。”她从蒂米脖子上取下了链子，蒂米立刻高兴地飞奔出去，闻闻这，嗅嗅那，咧着嘴、吐着舌头，兴高采烈，消失在了拐角处。
随即，传来了一阵可怕的狗叫声！孩子们仿佛被枪指着一样，突然怔住了，一动不动。听起来不像是一两只狗，而像是十几只！
孩子们赶紧冲到谷仓的拐角处，可怜的蒂米背对着谷仓，面对着三只凶恶的狗，咆哮着、狂吠着。
“别，乔治！别去蒂米那儿！”眼看乔治不顾一切要去救蒂米，朱利安大喊道，“这些都是恶狗！”
但乔治根本管不了那么多，她迅速地向蒂米跑去，将蒂米护在身后，并朝着那三只还在咆哮的狗大喊：“好大的胆子！走开！回去！给我回去！”
Chapter 5 THINGS MIGHT BE WORSE!
Chapter 5 THINGS MIGHT BE WORSE!
The three snarling dogs took no notice of George. It was Timmy they wanted. Who was this strangedog who dared to come wandering round their home? They tried to get at him, but 19George stood there, swinging the leather lead, and giving first one dog and then another a sharp flick.
Julian rushed to help her - and then Timmy gave a sharp yelp. He had been bitten!
Someone came rushing round the corner. It was Mrs. Jones, running as if she were a twelve-year-old!
'Tang! Bob! Dai!' she called, but the three dogs took no notice of her. And then, from somewhere,came a voice. What a voice! It echoed all round the farmyard as if it had come through a megaphone.
'DAI! BOB! TANG!'
And at the sound of that stentorian voice the three dogs stopped as if shot. Then they turned aboutand tore off at top speed.
'Thank God! That was Morgan,' panted the old woman, clutching her shawl round her. 'He must haveheard the barking. Oh, my little dear - are you hurt?' She took hold of George's arm, and looked at heranxiously.
'I don't know. I don't think so,' said George, looking rather white. 'It's Timmy that's hurt. Oh, Tim,darling Tim, where did they bite you?'
'Woof!' said Timmy, who, though extremely startled, didn't seem at all frightened. It had all happenedso suddenly. George dropped down on her knees in the snow, and gave a little scream.
'He's been bitten on the neck - oh look! Poor, poor, Timmy. Why did I let you off the lead?'
'It's not much, George,' said Julian, looking at the bleeding place. 'The other dog bit just where hiscollar is, look - and his teeth went through the collar, not really into Tim's neck. It's really not muchmore than a graze.'
Anne was leaning against the wall, looking sick, and Dick suddenly felt as if his legs were wobblyagain. He couldn't help thinking what would have happened if the three savage dogs had bittenGeorge instead of Timmy. Good old George! She was as brave as a lion!
'What a thing to happen!' said old Mrs. Jones, upset. 'Why for did you let him loose, my boy?
You should have waited for my Morgan to come along with his dogs, and tell them your Timmy wasa friend.'
'I know,' said George, still on her knees beside Timmy. 'It was all my fault. Oh, Timmy, I'm sothankful you've only got that one small bite. Mrs. Jones, have you any iodine? I must put some on atonce.'
20
But before Mrs. Jones could answer, the giant like figure of Morgan came round the corner of thebarn, his three dogs, extremely subdued now, at his heels.
'Hey?' he said, enquiringly, looking at the four children and his mother.
'The dogs attacked this one,' explained his mother. 'You shouted just in time, Morgan. But he's notmuch hurt. You should have seen this boy here - the one the dog belongs to - he stood in front of hisdog, and fought off Tang, Bob and Dai!'
Julian couldn't help smiling to hear George continually called a boy - but, standing there in snow-trousers and coat, a woollen cap on her short hair, she looked very like a sturdy boy.
'Please come and get the iodine,' said George, anxiously, seeing a drop of blood drip from Timmy'sneck on to the white snow. Morgan took a step forward and bent down to look at Timmy.
He made a small scornful sound and stood up again. 'He's all right,' he said, and walked off.
George stared after him angrily. It was his dogs that had attacked and hurt Timmy - and he hadn'teven been sorry about it! She felt so angry that tears came suddenly into her eyes. She blinked themaway, ashamed.
'I don't think I want to stay here,' she said, loudly and clearly. 'Those dogs will be sure to attackTimmy again. They might kill him. I shall go home.'
'Now, now, you're just upset,' said kind old Mrs. Jones, taking George's arm. George shook off herhand, scowling. 'I'm not upset. I'm just angry to think my dog should have been attacked for nothing -and I'm sure he'll be attacked again. And I want to see to his neck. I'm going indoors.'
She stalked off with Timmy at her heels, her head well up, bitterly ashamed of two more tears thatsuddenly ran down her cheeks. It wasn't like old George to cry! But she was still not quite herselfafter being ill. The other three looked at one another.
'Go with her, Anne,' said Julian, and Anne obediently ran after George. Julian turned to the worriedold woman.
'You shouldn't stand out here in the cold,' he said, seeing that she was shivering, and pulling hershawl more closely round her. 'George will soon be all right. Don't take any notice of what she says.'
'She! What, isn't she a boy, then?' said Mrs. Jones, in surprise. 'Is it a girl she is - as brave as that?
Now there's a fine thing, to be sure! What'll Morgan say to that? But now, surely she won't go home,will she?'
21
'No,' said Julian, hoping he was right. You never could tell with George! 'She'll soon get over it.
If we could get some iodine it would help, though! She's always terrified of wounds going bad, whereTimmy is concerned.'
'Come away in, then,' said Mrs. Jones, and hurried back to the farmhouse, refusing Julian's hand overthe snow. What an independent little old woman!
George was in the living-room with Timmy. She had got some water and was bathing the woundwith her handkerchief, having first taken off Tim's collar.
'I'll fetch you the iodine, boy,' said Mrs. Jones, forgetting again that George was a girl. She ran to herkitchen, and came back with a big bottle of brown liquid. George took it gratefully, and dabbed someon Timmy, who stood still, quite enjoying all the fuss. He jumped a little when the iodine stung him,and George patted him and praised him.
'He wouldn't mind having iodine dabbed on him all day long, George, if you would only make a fussof him,' said Dick, with a laugh.
George looked up. 'He might have been killed,' she said. 'And if those dogs get him again, hecertainly will be! I'm going to go back home - not to your home, Ju - but to my own, at KirrinCottage.'
'Oh, don't be an ass, George,' said Dick, exasperated. 'Anyone would think Timmy had been injuredfor life or something. He's only got a skin wound! Why spoil what may be a jolly good holiday justfor that?'
'I don't trust those three dogs,' said George, stubbornly. 'They'll be out to get Tim now - I know theywill. I tell you I'm going home. I'm not spoiling your holiday - only my own.'
'Well, listen - stay one more day,' said Julian, hoping that if she did, George would see how stupidlyshe was behaving. 'Just one more day. That's not much to ask. It will upset old Mrs.
Jones dreadfully if you rush off like this - and it will be difficult to make arrangements for you to goback today, now that everywhere is under snow again.'
'All right,' said George, ungraciously. 'I'll stay till tomorrow. It will give Timmy a bit of time to getover his fright. But ONLY till tomorrow.'
'Tim's not frightened,' said Anne. 'George, he would have taken on all three dogs by himself if youhadn't gone to his help. Wouldn't you, Timmy?'
'Woof, woof!' said Timmy, agreeing at once. He wagged his tail vigorously. Dick laughed. 'Good oldTim!' he said. 'You don't want to go home, do you?'
22
'Woof!' said Timmy, obligingly, and wagged his tail again. George put on one of her scowls, andJulian nudged the others to warn them to stop teasing her. He didn't want George suddenly to changeher mind and rush off home straightaway!
'I vote we go for a walk,' said Dick. 'It's a shame to stick indoors like this on this sunny, snowy day.
Anne, are you coming?'
'I will if George does,' said Anne. But George shook her head.
'No,' she said. 'I'll stay in with Tim this morning. You go off together.'
Anne wouldn't come, so the boys left the two girls and went out into the keen, invigorating mountainair once more. Already they felt better, and were not coughing at all. What a pity this had happened!
It spoilt things for everyone - even for old Mrs. Jones, who now appeared at her front door, lookinganxious.
'Don't you worry now, Mrs. Jones,' said Julian. 'I expect our cousin will be all right soon. She's givenup the idea of rushing home today at any rate! My brother and I are going for a walk up themountain. Which way is best?'
'Well now, take that path,' said the old woman, pointing. 'And go on till you come to our summerchalet. You can rest there before coming back - and if you don't want to come back for dinner, well,you'll find food in the cupboard there. Here is the key to get into the little place!'
'Oh thanks,' said Julian, surprised. 'That sounds good. We'd love to have our lunch up there, Mrs.
Jones - we'll be back before dark. Tell the girls for us, will you?'
And away they went, whistling. It was fun to have a day all to themselves, just the two of them,together!
They took the snowy path and began to climb up the slope of the mountain. The sun was now meltingthe snow a little, so they could make out the path fairly easily. Then they discovered that big blackstones marked the way here and there - a guide to the farmer and his men, when the snow coveredpath and everything!
The view was magnificent. As they climbed higher, they could see the tops of more and more hills,all of which sparkled snowy-white in the pale January sun.
'I say - if only we had a bit more snow, what tobogganing we could have down these slopes,' saidDick, longingly. 'I wish I'd brought my skis this morning - the snow is deep enough for them downthat hill - we'd whizz along like lightning!'
23
They were glad when they at last came to the little hut or chalet that old Mrs. Jones had spoken about.
After two hours' climbing it was nice to think of having something to eat, and a good rest!
'It's quite a place,' said Julian, slipping the key into the lock. 'A little wooden house, with windowsand all!'
He opened the door and went inside. Yes - it was a very fine little place indeed, with bunk-beds letinto the wooden walls, a stove for heating - and cupboards full of crockery - and tins of food!
The two boys had the same idea at once, and swung round to one another.
'Couldn't we stay here - on our own? George would love it too,' said Julian, putting into words whatDick was already thinking. Oh - if only they could!
5.雪上加霜
雪上加霜
三只咆哮的狗并没有理会乔治，它们的目标是蒂米。哪里来的这么一只奇怪的狗，还胆大包天敢在它们的地盘四周闲晃？它们试图瞄准蒂米，但是乔治挡在前面，手里捏着皮制狗链子，不停地快速甩动，击退了一只又一只想要进攻上来的狗。朱利安跑过去帮忙，但是紧接着蒂米就惨叫了一声，它被咬了！
有人从拐角处跑来，是琼斯太太，她跑得很快，仿佛青少年般矫健敏捷。
“唐！鲍勃！戴！”她大声喊道，但是三只狗并不理会她。接着，不知从何处传来了一个声音，在院子里久久回旋，震耳欲聋，就好像是从扩音器里面传出来的。
“唐！鲍勃！戴！”
听到那虎啸般的呼喊，三只狗戛然而止，不再攻击，掉头就跑开了，仿佛离弦的箭一般。
“谢天谢地！还好有摩根，”老妇人气喘吁吁地说，一边顺手裹紧了披肩，“他一定是听见自己的狗在乱叫了。对了，亲爱的宝贝，你受伤了吗？”她神情紧张，抓着乔治的胳膊仔细检查。
“我不知道。我应该没有被咬，”乔治说，脸色被吓得一片惨白，“但是蒂米受伤了。亲爱的蒂米，你哪儿被咬了？”
“汪！”蒂米回应，尽管受到了严厉恐吓，但它看起来一点也不害怕。一切都发生得太突然了。乔治腿一软，跪在了雪地里，痛声大叫：“它脖子被咬了！我可怜的蒂米！我不该解开链子让你单独行动的！”
“乔治别担心，咬得不深，”朱利安正在检查流血的伤口，“那只狗刚好咬了它的项圈，你看，项圈上还留下了牙印，不是直接咬在了蒂米的脖子上，应该就是皮外伤了。”
安妮倚在墙上，看起来虚弱极了。迪克也突然感觉双腿发软，颤颤巍巍。他简直不敢想象如果三只狗的目标是乔治，那将会发生什么惨状！乔治真是铮铮女汉子啊！简直跟狮子一样勇敢！
“真的太意外了！”琼斯太太沮丧地说，“小子，你为什么要解开链子呢？你们应该先见一见摩根和他的三只狗，然后想办法让狗狗们知道蒂米并没有恶意。”
“我明白了，”乔治俯身跪在蒂米旁边，“都是我的错。蒂米对不起，还好你的伤口不深不严重。琼斯太太，您有碘酒吗？我必须马上给蒂米擦一点。”
琼斯太太还没来得及回答，巨人般个头的摩根来了，脚后跟跟着他的三只狗，现在已经变得无比温顺了。
“大家还好吗？”看着四个孩子和自己的母亲，他关切地问道。
“你的狗攻击了这一只，”他妈妈解释道，“还好你及时喝止住了它们，幸好伤得不深。你快来安慰安慰这个男孩，他是狗的主人。
刚才他站在狗的前面，勇敢地和唐、鲍勃、戴正面交锋！”
看琼斯太太一个劲儿地叫乔治小男孩，朱利安忍不住笑了起来。不过，站在雪地里，穿着大棉裤，裹着厚外套，戴着羊毛帽，她又留着短发，确实会让人误以为她是一个健硕的男孩。
“请帮忙拿点碘酒过来。”一滴血从蒂米的脖子上滴下来，染红了白雪，乔治十分焦虑。摩根走上前去，弯下腰来，开始检查蒂米的伤口。
摩根哼了哼鼻子，随即站了起来：“没事的。”说完他就转身走了。乔治瞪着他，怒气冲冲。是他的狗攻击并伤害了蒂米，他连句抱歉都没有！乔治越想越生气，气得泪水在眼睛里打转。她迅速眨巴眼睛，把泪水赶走，这时的她简直又委屈又愤怒。
“我不想在这儿待着了，”她说得斩钉截铁，“这些狗肯定还会攻击蒂米的。它们简直想杀了蒂米，我必须回家了。”
“冷静点，你现在太沮丧了。”琼斯老太太抓着乔治的胳膊，友善地说。乔治挣脱开来，眉头紧锁一脸怒气：“我一点都不沮丧！我只是不明白，我的狗什么都没做，平白无故就遭受了攻击！这样它肯定还会受伤的。我想好好看看它的脖子，我要进屋了。”
她站了起来，紧紧牵着蒂米。两行泪水从她的脸上悄然滑落，这让她感到十分羞愧。这可不像乔治平日的作风，但她生病之后的表现确实跟平常不大一样。其他三个孩子你看看我，我看看你，都不知所措。
“安妮，你和她一起去，”朱利安说，然后安妮乖乖地跟了上去。朱利安转向那个忧心忡忡的老妇人。
“别站在寒风里了，”瞧见琼斯太太冷得发抖，把披肩裹得更紧了，朱利安贴心地说，“乔治很快就会冷静下来的，您别在意这女孩说的话。”
“女孩！难道她不是个‘男孩’？”琼斯太太惊讶地问，“一个女孩，像刚才那样勇敢？这真是一件好事！不知道摩根知道了会是什么反应？但现在，我想知道，她会回家吗？”
“不会，”朱利安回答，希望他的判断是正确的。但乔治向来善变，心思难以捉摸！“如果我们都帮忙，送些碘酒过去，她很快就能走出悲伤的！蒂米是她的心头肉，她非常担心蒂米伤口发炎，让情况变得更糟。”
“孩子们，跟我来。”琼斯太太一边说，一边谢绝了朱利安的搀扶，行色匆匆返回了农庄。多么要强的一个老太太啊！
乔治和蒂米都在客厅待着。她取了些水，脱下了蒂米的项圈，正在用手帕帮蒂米清理伤口。
“小子，我去给你取些碘酒来。”琼斯太太说，又忘了乔治是个女孩的事实。她快速地跑到厨房，取回了一瓶棕色液体。乔治拿到手里，十分感激，用手蘸了些涂到了蒂米的伤口处。蒂米则乖乖地站着，十分享受大家对它的宠爱。碘酒敷到伤口上时，蒂米痛得跳了一下。乔治在身旁一边拍着它的背，一边轻声鼓励它。
“乔治，如果你一直这么宠溺它，它肯定不介意一整天都在这儿敷碘酒。”迪克开玩笑说。
乔治狠狠地抬起头：“它差点就死了，如果这些狗又盯上它，它肯定逃不了的！我要回家了，我自己的家，在科林庄园的家！”
“乔治，别冲动啊，”迪克懊恼地说，“大家都知道这件事威胁到了蒂米的生命。但现在它只是受了皮外伤！为什么要因为这么一点小事就毁了这个美好的假期呢？”
“我再也不相信那三只狗了，”乔治固执地说，“说不定它们现在正在外面查找蒂米的下落呢，我知道它们肯定不会善罢甘休的。我说了我要回家。我并没有破坏你们的假日，我破坏的是自己的。”
“好吧，那再多待一天，”朱利安说，希望她能在一天的时间里反思自己愚蠢的行为，“就多待一天，这要求不算过分吧。如果你就这样贸然离开，肯定会伤了琼斯太太的心。而且今天很难安排车送你回去，你也看见了，到处都盖着雪。”
“行吧，”乔治不情愿地回答，“那就待到明天吧。这段时间也好让蒂米从惊吓中缓一缓。但明天就是最后期限！”
“乔治，其实蒂米一点也不害怕，”安妮说，“面对三只狗，它完全可以独当一面的，但是你非护在它前面。我说得对吗，蒂米？”
“汪，汪！”蒂米立刻回应了两声，以示赞同，还一个劲儿地摇尾巴。迪克忍不住笑了：“好家伙！你肯定不想回家吧，对吗？”
“汪！”蒂米温顺地又摇了摇尾巴。乔治眉头紧锁，朱利安立刻推了推迪克和安妮，警告他俩别再取笑乔治。他可不想乔治突然改变主意，又吵着闹着要立刻回家。
“我建议我们出去散散步，”迪克说，“在这样一个晴空万里又白雪皑皑的日子，整天窝在屋内真没劲。安妮，你要跟我一起吗？”
“如果乔治去，我就去。”安妮说。但是乔治摇了摇头。
“我不去了，”她说，“今天上午我要和蒂米待在房间里，你们一起去吧。”
安妮也不去了，所以两个男孩撇下两个女孩，独自去拥抱那让人神清气爽的山林空气。他们早就感觉好多了，不再咳嗽。发生这件事真的很不幸！它破坏了每个人的心情，甚至还有琼斯太太，此刻她出现在门口，看上去十分忐忑。
“别担心，琼斯太太，”朱利安说，“我想我堂妹很快会好起来的。她已经打消了今天必须回家的念头！我打算和弟弟去爬爬山，您知道哪条路风景最美吗？”
“那太好了！走那条路吧，”老太太一边说，一边给孩子们指路，“一直走，走到我们位于半山腰的小屋，你们可以在那休息一会儿，然后往回走。如果你们不想为了晚餐而赶回来的话，就到橱柜里找东西吃。这是小屋的钥匙。”
“太感谢了，”朱利安说道，一脸惊讶，“这简直太棒了！琼斯太太，我们想去山上吃午餐，天黑之前我们一定回来。麻烦您转告给女孩们，行吗？”
于是他们吹着口哨向山上出发。能清静一整天，还自得其乐，逍遥自在，对他们来说真是可遇不可求了。
他们走向那条白雪皑皑的小路，开始爬山。阳光已经融化了一部分积雪，所以他们能很轻易地分辨出道路。随后，他们发现一路上都有黑色石头做的记号，这是用于大雪封山时，指引农夫和当地人上下山的标记。
一路的景色十分壮观。他们爬得越高，就能看见更多的山顶，覆盖着白雪的山巅，在冬日阳光的照耀下闪闪发光。“要是雪积得再厚一点就好了，这样我们就能在这些斜坡上玩雪橇了，”迪克满脸期待，“我要是带了滑雪板就好了！滑雪板应该还是可以玩的，这样我们就能像一道闪电，迅速下山！”
抵达琼斯太太所说的那间小屋，他们非常开心。爬了两个小时，也是时候吃点东西，好好休息一下了。
“这个地方真不错，”朱利安一边说，一边把钥匙插进门锁里，“一间精致小巧的屋子，麻雀虽小却五脏俱全！”
他打开门走了进去。是的，这个地方确实很不错，墙边安置了一套木制上下双人床，一个生火的炉子，还有一个装满了陶器和罐头食物的橱柜！两个男孩突然默契地想到了一块儿，朝彼此走去。
“我们四个能不能独自待在这儿？乔治肯定很喜欢。”朱利安抢先一步，说出了迪克心里想说的话。对啊，要是可以就太棒了！
Chapter 6 A FUNNY LITTLE CREATURE
Chapter 6 A FUNNY LITTLE CREATURE
The boys were tired, but not too tired to examine the little hut thoroughly - though it really was morelike a one-roomed house. It faced across the deep valley, and the sun shone straight into it.
Julian opened cupboard after cupboard, exclaiming in delight.
'Bedding! Towels! Crockery - and cutlery! And look at these tins of food - and bottles of orangeadeand the rest! My word, people who come to stay at Magga Glen in the summer must have a finetime!'
'We could light the stove to heat the room,' suggested Dick, pulling the oil-stove into the middle ofthe room.
'No. We don't need to,' said Julian. 'The sun is pouring in, and it really isn't cold in here. We couldwrap ourselves round in the rugs from that cupboard if we want to.'
'Do you think we'd be allowed to come up here, instead of living down at the farm?' said Dick,opening a tin of ham with a tin-opener that hung on a nail by the cupboard. 'It's so much nicer to bequite on our own and independent! George would simply love it!'
'Well, we can ask,' said Julian, taking the cap off a bottle of orangeade. 'Can we find some biscuits toeat with this ham? Oh yes - here are some cream-cracker biscuits. I say - I'm really ravenous!'
24
'So am I,' said Dick, his mouth full. 'Pity George was such an ass - she and Anne could have enjoyedthis too.'
'Well - perhaps on the whole it's as well they didn't come,' said Julian. 'I think Anne would have beentoo tired to come all this way on her first day - and George certainly had a worse cold and cough thananyone. A day at the farm will probably do her good. Gosh - she's absolutely fearless, isn't she? I'llnever forget her standing up to those three savage dogs! I was jolly scared myself.'
'I'm going to get a rug and wrap it round me and sit out on the doorstep in the sun,' said Dick.
'That view is too marvellous for words!'
He and Julian took a rug each, and then sat out on the wooden door-step, munching their ham andbiscuits. They stared across at the great hill opposite.
'Is that a house on the slope over there - near the top, look,' said Dick, suddenly.
Julian stared across at the opposite hill, but could make out nothing.
'It can't be,' he said. 'The roof would be covered with snow, and we'd never see it. Besides, whowould build a house so high up?'
'Plenty of people,' said Dick. 'It's not everyone who likes towns and shops and cinemas and traffic andthe rest. I can imagine an artist building a house on one of these mountains, just for the view! He'd bequite happy looking at it and painting it all day long.'
'Well - I like a bit of company, I must say,' said Julian. 'This is all right for a week or two - but you'dneed to be an artist or a poet - or a shepherd or something, to stand it all the time!'
He yawned. Both boys had finished their meal, and felt comfortably full and at peace. Dick yawnedtoo, and lay back on his rug. But Julian pulled him upright.
'Oh no! We're not going to take naps up here! We'd sleep like logs again, and wake up in the dark.
The sun's going down already, and we've got all that long walk back to the farm - and no torch tolight our way if we go wrong!'
'There are those black stones,' said Dick, with another yawn. 'All right, all right - I agree with you! Icertainly don't want to stumble down this mountain in the pitch dark!'
Julian suddenly clutched Dick's arm, and pointed upwards, where the path still wound on and on.
Dick turned - and stared. Someone was up there, skipping down the path towards them, with a lambgambolling around, and a small dog scampering after.
'Is it a boy or a girl?' said Julian, in wonder. 'My word - it must be cold, whichever it is!'
25
It was a small girl coming along, a wild-looking little creature with a mass of untidy black curls, aface as brown as an oak-apple - and very few clothes! She wore a dirty pair of boy's shorts, and ablue blouse - or it might have been a shirt. Her legs were bare, and she had old shoes on her feet. Shewas singing as she came, in a high sweet voice like a bird's.
The dog with her began to bark, and she stopped her song at once. She spoke to the dog, and hebarked again, facing towards the hut. The lamb gambolled round without stopping.
The little girl looked towards the hut, and saw Julian and Dick. She turned at once and ran back theway she had come. Julian got up and shouted to her.
'It's all right! We shan't hurt you! Look - here's a bit of meat for your dog!'
The girl stopped and looked round, poised ready to run again at once. Julian waved the bit of ham leftover from their meal. The little dog smelt it on the wind, and came running up eagerly.
He snapped at it, got it into his mouth and ran back to the girl. He didn't attempt to eat it, but juststood there by her, looking up.
She bent down eagerly, and took it. She tore it in half and gave one piece to the eager dog, whoswallowed it at once - and the other piece she ate herself, keeping a sharp eye on the two boys as shedid so. The lamb came nosing round her, and she put one thin arm round its neck.
'What a queer little thing,' said Julian to Dick. 'Where can she have come from? She must beabsolutely frozen!'
Dick called to the child. 'Hallo! Come and talk to us!'
She shot off at once as soon as he shouted. But she didn't go very far. She half hid behind a bush,peeping out now and again.
'Get some of those biscuits,' said Julian to Dick. 'We'll hold some out to her. She's like a wild thing.'
So Dick held out a handful of biscuits, and called: 'Biscuits! For you! And your dog!'
But only the lamb came gambolling up, a toy-like creature, with a tail that frisked and whisked all thetime. It tried to get on to Dick's knee, and bumped its little black nose against his face.
'Fany, Fany!' called the small girl, in a high, clear voice. The lamb tried to get away but Dick held onto it. It seemed to be all legs!
'Come and get it!' shouted Dick. 'We shan't hurt you!'
The little girl couldn't bear to leave her lamb. She came out from the bush, and took a few hesitatingsteps towards the boys. The dog ran right up to them, snuffling at their hands for more 26ham. Julian gave him a biscuit and he crunched it up at once, giving sidelong glances at his watchingmistress as if to apologise for eating it all himself! Julian patted the little thing and it licked himjoyfully.
The little girl came nearer. Her legs looked blue with cold, but although she had so little on, shedidn't seem to be shivering. Julian held out another biscuit. The dog jumped up and took it neatly inhis mouth, running up to the little girl with it. The boys burst into laughter, and the small girl smiledsuddenly, her whole face lighting up.
'Come here!' called Julian. 'Come and get your pretty lamb. We've got some more biscuits for youand your dog.'
At last the child came near to them, as watchful as a hare, ready to run at a moment's notice. Theboys sat still and patient, and soon the girl was near enough to snatch a biscuit and retreat again.
She sat down on one of the black stones marking the path, and munched her biscuit, staring at themall the time out of her big dark eyes.
'What's your name?' asked Dick, not moving from his place, afraid that the child would leap off like afrightened goat.
The girl didn't seem to understand. Dick repeated his question, speaking slowly.
'What - is - your - name? What - are - you - called?'
The child nodded her head and then pointed to herself.
'Me - Aily,' she said.
She pointed at the dog.
'Dave,' she said, and he leapt up at his name and covered her with licks. Then she pointed to the lamb,which was now gambolling round the boys like a mad thing. 'Fany,' she said.
'Ah - Aily - Dave - Fany,' said Julian, solemnly, and he too pointed at first one then the other.
Then he pointed to himself. 'Julian!' he said, and then pointed to Dick. 'Dick!'
The little girl gave a high, clear laugh, and suddenly poured out quite a long speech. The boyscouldn't understand a word of it.
'She's speaking in Welsh, I suppose,' said Dick, disappointed. 'What a pity - it sounds lovely, but Ican't make head or tail of it.'
The child saw that they had not understood. She frowned, as if thinking hard.
'My Dadda - he up high - sheep!' she said.
'Oh - your father's a shepherd up there!' said Dick. 'But you don't live with him, do you?'
27
Aily considered this, then shook her head.
'Down!' she said, pointing. 'Aily down!' Then she turned to the dog and the lamb, and cuddled themboth. 'Dave mine,' she said, proudly. 'Fany mine!'
'Nice dog. Nice lamb,' said Julian, solemnly, and the little girl nodded in delight. Then, for no reasonthat the boys could see, she stood up, leapt down the hill, followed by the lamb and the dog, anddisappeared.
'What a funny little creature!' said Dick. 'Like a pixie of the hills, or an elf of the woods. I quiteexpected her to disappear in smoke, or something. I should think she runs completely wild, wouldn'tyou? We'll ask Mrs. Jones about her when we get back!'
'My goodness - come on, the sun's getting quite low,' said Julian, getting up in a hurry. 'We've got toput the things away, and fold up the rugs, and lock up. Buck up - once the sun goes it will be darkalmost at once, and we've quite a long way to go.'
It didn't take them long to tidy up and lock the little house carefully. Then down the path they went attop speed. The sun had melted most of the snow farther down, and the going was easy.
The boys felt exhilarated by their day on the mountainside and sang as they went, until they werequite out of breath.
'There's the farmhouse,' said Dick, and both boys were glad to see it. Their legs were tired now, andthey longed for a good meal and a rest in a warm room.
'I hope George has recovered a bit by now - and is still at the farm!' said Julian, with a laugh.
'You never know with old George! I hope she'll like the sound of that hut. We'll ask Mrs. Jones aboutit tonight, when we've talked it over with Anne and George.'
'Here we are,' said Dick, thankfully, as they went up to the house. 'Anne! George! We're back -where are you?'
6.山间的小屋与小家伙
山间的小屋与小家伙
男孩们累得精疲力竭，但这并不能打消他们探索小屋的兴致。
这间小屋只有一个房间，面朝深谷，太阳穿过玻璃，直射进来。朱利安打开一个又一个柜门，满心欢喜地去寻找新奇玩意。
“被褥！毛巾！陶器！餐具！还有这满满的食品罐头，一瓶瓶橙汁。要我说，谁夏天要是来了这玛嘉峡谷，肯定特别爽！”
“我们可以点火取暖。”迪克一边建议，一边把煤油炉子挪到了屋子中间。
“不用呀，”朱利安说，“阳光暖融融的，这儿其实一点也不冷。
如果冷的话，可以去柜子里取些毛毯盖上。”
“你觉得琼斯太太会允许我们离开农场，单独住在这里吗？”迪克一边问，一边顺手拿了挂在橱柜钩子上的起子，开了一个火腿罐头，“如果能单独活动，我们会更自在的！乔治肯定也会喜欢的！”
“是啊，我们可以争取一下，”朱利安一边说，一边打开了一瓶橙汁，“有没有饼干呀，我想就着火腿一起吃。噢，我看到了，这儿有一些奶油夹心饼干。天啊，我真的饿了！”
“我也是，”迪克把饼干塞得满嘴都是，话都说不清楚了，“乔治可真是一头倔驴。本来她俩也能来这儿享受享受。”
“或许她俩根本就没打算来呢，”朱利安说，“安妮一路过来，肯定累坏了。乔治的感冒和咳嗽是最严重的，在农场里待着休息一天或许更好。不过话说回来，她真的是天不怕地不怕，是吧？她居然挺起胸膛，敢直面那三只恶狗，简直让我大跌眼镜！我都要吓死了！”
“我去取一块毯子裹着，然后到门口的台阶上晒太阳去，”迪克岔开话题，“那里的风景简直美得妙不可言！”
两人都取了一块毯子，坐到了木门台阶上，惬意地吃着火腿和饼干，欣赏着对面巍峨的大山。
迪克突然说：“快看，斜坡上有一座房子，就在山顶的不远处。”
朱利安盯着对面那山丘，但还是什么也没发现。
“别瞎说，”他说，“就算有房子，房顶都被大雪覆盖着，你怎么看得见它。另外，谁会把房子建在这么高的地方呢？”
“很多人都会啊，”迪克说，“并不是所有人都喜欢城市、商场、影院，受得了交通堵塞的。我猜想可能是某个艺术家把房子建在山上，只因青睐这山林美景。这样，他一整天都身临其境，陶醉作画，自己肯定也乐在其中。”
“好吧，那我必须承认，我可得找些人跟我待在一起，”朱利安说，“虽然待上一两周问题也不大，但是只有艺术家、诗人或者牧羊人，等等，才会想要独守在这里！”
说完，朱利安打了个哈欠。他们吃得十分满足。迪克也跟着打了个哈欠，裹着毛毯就准备顺势躺下，但及时被朱利安拉了起来。
“不行，我们不能在这里打盹！不然我们肯定又睡得跟猪一样，醒来天就黑了。太阳眼看就要下山了，我们回农场还有那么长的路。万一走错了路，又没有手电筒，我可说不准会发生什么！”
“有黑色的石头标记，你怕什么，”迪克懒洋洋地回复，又打了个哈欠，“好，好。你说的都对！我也不想在漆黑一片的夜里连滚带爬着下山！”
朱利安突然抓住迪克的胳膊，向前方指了指，那是一条持续往上延伸的道路。迪克转过身来，瞪大了眼睛。有个人影，正朝他们走来，那个人身边有只蹦蹦跳跳的山羊，身后还跟了一只欢快的狗。
“是男孩还是女孩啊？”朱利安好奇地问道，“天啊！但不管是男是女，她肯定很冷！”
朝他们走来的是个小女孩，看上去有点野蛮，跟小动物似的，一头凌乱的黑色鬈发，长了一张老橡树般棕色的脸，而且穿得非常少！她穿了一件脏脏的男士短裤，蓝色上衣，看着像是一件衬衣。
她光着双腿，脚上穿了一双破旧不堪的鞋。她一路走，一路高歌，歌声就如百灵鸟一样婉转动听。
她身旁的狗叫了起来，小女孩立刻停止歌唱，她对狗说了什么，狗对着小屋又开始叫起来。而那只小羊依旧很欢快。
小女孩看向小屋，发现了朱利安和迪克。于是立刻转身，一路小跑，原路返回。朱利安立刻站起来大声喊：
“别害怕！我们不会伤害你的！你看，这儿有一些肉，可以拿给你的狗吃。”
女孩停下了脚步，转过身来，但还是保持警惕，随时准备跑走。朱利安把吃剩的火腿拿在手里，挥了挥。小狗闻到火腿的味道，急切地跑了过来。它把火腿衔在嘴里，返回到女孩身边。它没有要吃掉的打算，而是安静地站在女孩身边，然后抬头看向女孩。
女孩心急地弯下腰，取下火腿分成两半，分了一半给狗吃。狗狗显然迫不及待，一口就吞下去了。另一半女孩自己吃了，一边吃一边警惕地盯着两个男孩。山羊来到女孩身边，亲昵地蹭一蹭，女孩蹲下身，把一只手搭在了山羊脖子上。
“真是奇遇啊！”朱利安对迪克说，“她从哪里冒出来的？她肯定超级冷吧！”
迪克对女孩说：“你好！我们交个朋友吧！”
迪克一开口，她就敏捷地后退了好几步，但走得并不远。她躲在一处灌木丛后面，不时偷偷看一看他们。
“去拿些饼干来，”朱利安对迪克说，“我们分给她一些，她看上去跟个野孩子似的。”
随即，迪克捧了满满一手的饼干出来，大喊：“饼干！给你和你的小狗！”
但只有小山羊来到了他们跟前，一蹦一跳地像玩具一样，尾巴一直不停地摇。它试图钻进迪克的怀里，然后用自己的小黑鼻子蹭他的脸。
“范尼，范尼！”小女孩扯着嗓子尖声叫道。小羊试图离开，但被迪克一把抓住了。
“过来把它抱回去吧！”迪克大声说，“我们不会伤害你的！”
小女孩舍不得自己的小羊，从灌木丛里走了出来，朝着男孩们犹犹豫豫走了几步。身边的小狗嗅着空气里飘着的火腿味，撒欢地向他们跑去。朱利安给了它一块饼干，它吃得嘎吱作响、津津有味，还不时看一看自己的小主人，貌似对自己独食的行为感到抱歉。朱利安轻轻抚摸它，它就开心地舔舔朱利安。
小女孩也走近了。她的腿冻得发紫，但是尽管穿得这么少，她似乎也没有冻得瑟瑟发抖。朱利安递出另一块饼干，小狗跳起来一口咬住，恭恭敬敬地跑到女孩身边。见此，男孩们都开怀大笑，女孩也跟着笑了起来，整张脸都绽放出光彩。
“来这儿！”朱利安说道，“你的小羊在这儿。我们给你和你的小狗准备了一些饼干。”
最终，女孩放下防备，来到他们身边，但还是像一只兔子一样警惕，时刻准备着转身跑走。男孩们坐着不动，耐心十足。女孩迅速地上前取了一块饼干，又极为迅速地后退。她坐在一块黑色的石头路标上，一边大口咀嚼饼干，一边眨巴着黑色的大眼睛，直勾勾地盯着男孩们。
“你叫什么名字？”迪克坐在原地一动不动，生怕自己的轻微举动会吓到这个女孩。
女孩似乎没听懂。迪克又轻声地问了一遍：“我说，你叫什么名字？”
女孩点了点头，指了指自己：“我，艾丽。”又指了指狗：“大卫。”
听到自己的名字，小狗跳了起来，舔了舔小主人。然后女孩指向小羊，它正在男孩身边快乐地打转呢。“它叫范尼。”她说。
“艾丽、大卫、范尼，”朱利安认真严肃地，一个一个指着说。
然后他指指自己说：“朱利安。”然后又指指迪克：“迪克！”
女孩见状，大笑起来，然后叽里咕噜说了一长段话。但男孩们一个字都没听懂。
“她说的应该是威尔士语吧，”迪克说着，语气略带一丝失望，“太可惜了！听起来很有意思，但我什么也没听懂。”
女孩似乎了解到两个男孩没听懂她说的话，皱了皱眉，看上去正在思索着什么。
“我爸爸，他山上，羊！”她说道。
“哦！你爸爸是牧羊人！”迪克反应道，“但你不和他一起生活，对不对？”
艾丽仔细理解了一番，但还是摇了摇头。
“下面！”她边说边指，“艾丽，下面！”然后，她转向小羊羔和小狗，俯下身子抱了抱，骄傲地说：“大卫，我的。范尼，我的！”
“小狗很听话，小羊也很可爱。”朱利安认真地评价道，小女孩乐得直点头。但突然没来由的，女孩站起身来，朝山下跑去，羔羊和小狗追随她而去，消失在路的尽头。
“这家伙真有趣！”迪克说，“就像山里的精灵，或森林里的小仙子。我还挺期待她变成一缕烟或是其他什么，然后消失不见。她跑起来简直就像个野孩子，对吧？我们回去后就向琼斯太太问问她的情况！”
“天啊！我们走吧，太阳快下山了，”朱利安匆匆忙忙站起身，“快把这儿收拾一下，把毯子叠好，放回柜子锁起来。动作快点！太阳一旦落山，很快就会漆黑一片，我们下山的路还长着呢！”
他们利索地收拾整理完了一切，然后小心翼翼关好了门。随即以最快的速度，原路下山。经过太阳一天的照耀，路上的积雪已经融化了许多，走起来也更容易了。男孩们兴高采烈地在山路上快速走着，边走边唱歌，累得气喘吁吁。
“那里就是农舍了。”迪克说，两个男孩很高兴见到它。他们已经双腿灌铅，十分渴望找个暖和的地方休息一下，吃顿饱饭。
“但愿乔治的心情已经平复了，还待在农场里！”朱利安说道，转念一想，又笑着说，“乔治总是非常善变！希望她能喜欢我们说的那个小屋吧！跟安妮和乔治商量了以后，我今晚就去征求琼斯太太的同意。”
“我们回来了！”迪克一边朝农舍走去，一边大声喊，“安妮！乔治！我们回来了，你们在哪儿呢？”
Chapter 7 BACK AT THE FARM AGAIN
Chapter 7 BACK AT THE FARM AGAIN
Anne came running to meet Dick and Julian. 'Oh, I'm glad you're back!' she said. 'It's beginning to getdark, and I was afraid you'd lose your way!'
28
'Hallo, George!' said Julian, seeing her behind Anne, in the darkness of the passage. 'How's Timmy?'
'All right, thank you,' said George, sounding quite cheerful. 'Here he is!'
Timmy barked loudly and jumped up at the boys in welcome. He was very glad to see them, for hehad been afraid that they had gone back home. They all went into the living-room, where there wasan enormous wood- fire, looking very cheerful indeed. Julian and Dick fell into the two mostcomfortable chairs and spread their legs out to the fire.
'Ha! This is good!' said Dick. 'I couldn't have walked another step. I don't believe I can even go upthe stairs to wash. We've walked MILES!'
They told the girls about their day, and when they described the little summer chalet, the two girlslistened eagerly.
'Oh - I wish we'd gone with you,' said Anne, longingly. 'Timmy would have been quite all right,wouldn't he, George? We've decided it's only a skin-wound. Actually, you can hardly see it now.'
'But all the same, I'm going back home tomorrow,' said George, determinedly. 'I'm sorry I made sucha fuss this morning - but honestly I thought Timmy had been badly bitten. Thank goodness he wasn't.
Still, I'm not risking such a thing again. If I stay on here with him, he's sure to have those three dogsattacking him sometime or other, and he might be killed. I don't want to upset your holiday - but I canNOT stay on here with Tim.'
'All right, old thing,' said Julian, soothingly. 'Don't get so up-in-the-air about it. There - you've goneand started your cough again! Do you know, Dick and I haven't coughed once today!'
'Nor have I,' said Anne. 'The air is marvellous here. I think I ought to go back with George, though,Ju. She'd be miserable all by herself at home.'
'Listen,' said Julian. 'We've got an idea, Dick and I - one that means old George won't have to gohome, and...'
'Nothing will make me stop here,' interrupted George at once. 'NOTHING!'
'Give me a chance to tell you what I've got up my sleeve,' protested Julian. 'It's about that mountain-hut we've been to - Dick and I thought it would be a marvellous idea if we could all five of us go andspend our time there - instead of here. We'd be ABSOLUTELY on our own then - the way we like tobe!'
'Oh yes!' said Anne at once, delighted. They all three looked at George. She smiled suddenly.
29
'Yes - that would be fun. I'd like that. I don't suppose those dogs would come near there. And howheavenly to be on our own!'
'Mrs. Jones said that her son Morgan told her we're going to have heavy falls of snow!' said Anne.
'We could spend all day long on those slopes with our toboggans and skis. Oh, George -what a pity Timmy can't ski! We'll have to leave him at the hut when we go off skiing!'
'Do you suppose Mrs. Jones will mind us going off there?' said Dick.
'I don't think so,' said Anne. 'She was telling us today that parties of children go there alone in thesummer, while their parents stay and have a peaceful time down here. I don't see why she shouldn'tlet us go. We'll ask her when she comes in with our high tea. I said we wouldn't have tea and supper -we'd just have one big meal. We didn't know what time you'd be back - and George and I had such anenormous dinner in the middle of the day that we knew we wouldn't want tea.'
'Yes. I'd rather have a big meal now, too,' said Julian, yawning widely. 'I'm afraid all I shall want todo afterwards is to go up to bed and fall asleep. I'm marvellously tired. In fact, I could go to sleep thisvery minute! I suppose you girls have been indoors all day long because of Timmy?'
'No. We took it in turns to go for a walk without him,' said Anne. 'George hasn't let him put his noseoutside the door. Poor Timmy - he just couldn't understand it, and he whined and whined!'
'Never mind - he'll enjoy himself if we can go up to that hut,' said George, who was very cheerfulindeed now. 'I do hope we can. It would be glorious fun.'
'Ju - come and wash,' said Dick, seeing that Julian had his eyes closed already. 'Julian! Come up andwash, I tell you - you don't want to miss your meal, do you?'
Julian groaned and dragged himself up the stone stairway. But once he had sluiced himself in coldwater he felt much better, and very hungry indeed. So did Dick.
'We didn't tell the girls about that funny little creature - what was her name now - Aily! And Dave herdog and Fany the lamb. We mustn't forget to ask Mrs. Jones about them,' said Julian.
They went downstairs, feeling much fresher and were delighted to see that Mrs. Jones had been inand laid the table. They went up to see what there was for their high tea.
'Pork pie - home made, of course,' said Dick. 'And what's this - golly, it's a cheese! How enormous!
Smell it, Julian - it's enough to make you start eating straightaway! And more of that home-madebread! Can't we start?'
30
'No - there are new-laid boiled eggs to begin with,' said Anne, with a laugh. 'And an apple pie andcream to end with. So I hope you really are hungry, you two!'
Mrs. Jones came in with a pot of hot tea. She smiled at the boys as she set the big brown teapot downon the table.
'Is it a nice day you've had, away up on the mountain?' she said. 'You look fine, both of you. Did youfind the hut all right?'
'Yes, thank you,' said Julian. 'Mrs. Jones, it's a marvellous hut. We...'
'Yes, yes - it's a good hut,' said Mrs. Jones, 'and it's sorry I was the two girls didn't go with you, sucha fine day as it was, and the dog not really hurt! And to think that the girls want to go back home! It'ssad I've been this day in my thoughts!'
She really did seem hurt and grieved, and George looked very guilty. Julian patted Mrs. Jones on thearm, and spoke comfortingly.
'Don't you worry about us, Mrs. Jones. I've got a fine idea to tell you. What we'd really like is to goand live up at that hut, the five of us - then we'd be out of your way and Timmy would be out of theway of the farm dogs too! Do you think we might do that? Then George wouldn't have to go home, asshe had planned to do.'
'Well now! To go to that hut in this weather! What an idea!' said Mrs. Jones. 'Most uncomfortableyou would be, with no one to look after you, and see to your wants, and cook for you this coldweather. No, no...'
'We're used to looking after ourselves,' said Dick. 'We're awfully good at it, Mrs. Jones. And, myword, the food you've got up there is enough to feed an army! And there are cups and plates anddishes - and knives and forks - and all kinds of bedding...'
'We'd have a smashing time,' said George, joining in eagerly. 'I don't really want to go home, Mrs.
Jones. It's so lovely in these mountains - and if the snow comes down, as your Morgan says, we'd beable to have winter sports all on our own!'
'Oh, do say it's all right,' begged Anne. 'We shall be quite safe and happy there - and we do promiseto come down here again if we can't manage, or if anything goes wrong.'
'I'll see that things go all right,' said Julian, speaking in his most grown-up voice.
'Well - well, it's a queer idea you have,' said Mrs. Jones, still taken aback. 'I'll have to talk to myMorgan about it first. Now set you down and eat your meal. I'll get my Morgan to decide.'
31
She went out of the room, shaking her head, her mouth pursed up in disapproval. No fire! No hotmeals! No one to 'manage' for them. What a dreadful time those children would have up in that hut inthis weather!
The five set to work to demolish the good food on the table. George allowed Timmy to sit up on achair too, and fed him with titbits for a treat. He was perfectly good and very well-mannered indeed.
'I almost expect him to hand me a plate of something!' said Anne, with a giggle. 'Tim, dear - do passme the salt!'
Timmy put a paw on the table exactly as if he meant to obey Anne, and George hastily made him putit down again! What a meal that was! The pork pie was so good that everyone had two slices, as wellas their boiled eggs. Then they started on the cheese, which even Timmy liked. There was very littleroom indeed for the apple pie that Mrs. Jones brought in at the end!
'My goodness - I forgot that an apple pie was coming,' said Anne, in dismay, as the old womanwalked in with a tray on which was a big apple pie and a jug of cream.
'Mrs. Jones - when we were up at the hut, we saw such a funny little creature,' said Dick. 'She saidher name was Aily and she had a lamb and a...'
'Oh, Aily! That mad little thing!' said Mrs. Jones, picking up the dirty plates. 'She's the shepherd'sdaughter - a little truant she is, runs off from school, and hides away in the hills with her dog and herlamb. She always has a lamb each year - it follows her about everywhere. They say there isn't a rabbithole or a blackberry bush or a bird's nest that child doesn't know!'
'She was singing when we first saw her,' said Julian. 'Singing like a bird.'
'Ah, yes - it's a lovely voice she has,' said Mrs. Jones. 'She's wild as a bird - there's nothing to be donewith her. If she's scolded she goes off for weeks, no one knows where. Don't you let her come roundthat hut now, when you're there - she'll maybe steal from you!'
'Oh, yes - the hut! Have you spoken to Morgan about it?' said Dick, eagerly.
'Yes, I have indeed,' said Mrs. Jones. 'And he says yes, to let you go. He doesn't want trouble with thedogs either. He says snow is coming for sure, but you'll be safe up there and you can take all yourtoboggans for there'll be a chance to use them! He'll help you up with your things.'
'Oh good! Thanks!' said Julian, and the others smiled and looked at one another joyfully. 'Thanksmost awfully, Mrs. Jones. We'll go tomorrow after breakfast!'
Tomorrow! After breakfast! Up to that lonely hut on the mountainside, just the Five of them together.
What could be better than that?
7.返回农场
返回农场
安妮跑出来迎接迪克和朱利安。“你们回来了！”她高兴地说，“天都快黑了，我很担心你们会迷路。”
“乔治，你还好吗！”在黑暗的走廊里，朱利安看到乔治就站在安妮身后，“蒂米怎么样了？”
“一切正常，谢谢关心，”乔治轻快地说道，“它在这儿！”蒂米大叫起来，激动地朝孩子们扑了过来。见到孩子们，它非常高兴，它还以为两个男孩已经回家了。他们一起去了客厅，壁炉里跳跃的火苗燃得正旺，看上去也是十分灵动欢快。朱利安和迪克舒服地窝在两把躺椅里，把腿伸向前取暖。
“哈！太舒服了！”迪克说，“我真的走不动了！我都不愿上楼去洗脸，我们可是走了好几英里。”
他们把一天的经历一字不落地告诉了女孩们，当讲到那个夏季小屋的时候，两个女孩都听得入了迷。
“哎！真希望我们能跟你们一起去，”安妮说道，言语里充满了期待和渴望，“乔治，蒂米很快就会痊愈的，对吗？我们都认为是皮肉伤，而且伤口现在基本上都看不见了。”
“尽管如此，我明天还是要回家，”乔治坚决地说，“很抱歉上午弄出这么一个乱子来，说实话我当时真觉得蒂米被咬得很严重。好在事实并非如此。所以，我不会再轻易冒险了。如果我和它待在这里，指不定某个时候又会被攻击，甚至蒂米还有可能被咬死。我不想破坏大家的假期，但是我和蒂米真的不能留在这儿。”
“好的，我们理解，”朱利安安慰说，“你也不要太敏感了，你看你的咳嗽又加重了！我和迪克今天一点都没咳嗽！”
“我也没有！”安妮说，“这里的空气太新鲜了。但我可能会和乔治一起回家，她一个人回去肯定会特别痛苦。”
“听着，”朱利安说，“我和迪克想了一个点子，肯定会让乔治想要留下来的，而且……”
“我不会改变主意的，”乔治立刻打断他，“无论如何都不会！”
“你先听我说完，好不好，”朱利安抗议，“是关于那座山间小屋的，我和迪克都认为如果我们五个能独自待在那里，一定非常不错。到时候，我们都自由自在，无拘无束！这不正是我们最期待的嘛！”
“对呀！”安妮高兴地附和。他们三个都看向乔治，乔治突然就咧嘴笑了，说：“是的，那一定会很有趣，我也很喜欢。而且那些狗肯定不会到附近来骚扰我们，这个主意太棒了！”
“琼斯太太说她儿子告诉她，接下来会下大雪！”安妮说，“我们可以在斜坡上玩一整天雪橇、滑雪。哎，真可惜，蒂米不能滑雪。
我们去滑雪的时候，必须要把蒂米留在小屋里了！”
迪克问：“你们认为琼斯太太会同意我们去吗？”
“我觉得会！”安妮说，“她今天告诉我们，许多小孩子夏天都会独自上山，而他们的父母则在农庄里待着，等他们回来。所以根本没有理由不让我们去呀。待会她过来的时候，我们问问她吧。我跟琼斯太太说了我们不需要下午茶和晚餐。因为我和乔治在中午的时候饱餐了一顿，而且我们还不知道你们什么时候回来。”
“是的，我现在也想吃一顿大餐，”朱利安张大嘴，打了个哈欠，“估计吃过饭，我就想直接上床睡觉了。我真是精疲力竭了。只要给我一分钟，我就能立刻睡着！你们两个是不是和蒂米在房间里待了一整天呀？”
“没有，我们轮流单独出门散步了，”安妮说，“乔治把蒂米管得很严，不准它迈出大门一步。可怜的蒂米无法理解，一个劲儿地发牢骚。”
“没关系，如果我们能去那间小屋，蒂米肯定会很快乐自在的，”乔治笑逐颜开地说，“真希望我们能去呀，肯定超级有意思！”
“朱利安，来洗把脸，”看见朱利安的眼睛都在打架了，迪克赶紧说，“快来洗洗脸。你还想不想吃晚餐了？”
朱利安满不情愿，哀号着拖着身子上了石梯。他用冷水冲了冲脸，浑身一激灵，一下子清醒多了，而且愈发饥饿，迪克也有同感。
朱利安突然想到：“我们还没说遇到的那个奇怪小女孩呢！她叫什么名字来着？哦，对了，是艾丽！她的狗叫大卫，还有她的小羊范尼。我们一定要向琼斯太太打听打听。”
随后他们下了楼，感觉一身清爽，正好看到琼斯太太正在布置餐桌，他们赶紧跑过去，食物已经准备好了。
“自制猪肉饼，”迪克说，“这又是什么？哇！是奶酪！这么大一块！朱利安你快闻一闻，肯定超级好吃！还有自制面包！我们可以开吃了吗？”
“还不行，刚开始煮鸡蛋，”安妮笑着说，“还得加上苹果派和奶油一起吃。所以希望你们是真的饿了，好好饱餐一顿吧！”
琼斯太太拿着一壶热茶又进来了，一边把热茶放到桌子上，一边笑着对两个男孩说：“今天在山上玩得开心吗？你们看着精神不错呀，所以应该顺利抵达小屋了吧？”
“是的，琼斯太太，”朱利安回答说，“谢谢您，那个小屋真的太棒了。我们……”
“是的！那个小屋确实不赖哦。”琼斯太太说，“两个女孩没跟你们一起去，有点遗憾呀。今天天气这么好，小狗伤得也不重！真没想到两个女孩待了一天就想回家了，真的很遗憾呀。”
她看上去真的伤心极了，乔治也很不好意思。朱利安拍拍琼斯太太的手，安慰她说：“别为我们担心了，琼斯太太！我们想到了一个好主意。我们非常喜欢那座小屋，我们五个想一起去那里玩。这样的话，我们可以远离农场里的狗。您觉得这样行吗？这样的话，乔治也就不用按原计划回家了。”
“这个季节！？在这样的天气去小屋？”琼斯太太大叫道，“这真是鬼主意！天气这么冷，没大人跟着，没人照料，没人做饭，你们肯定会生病的！不行不行……”
“我们很会照顾自己的，”迪克说，“您放心吧。而且，琼斯太太，您在橱柜里塞满了食物，足够养活一支军队了！杯子、盘子、刀叉、被褥，应有尽有……”
“我们一定会过得很开心的，”乔治热切地加入了对话，“琼斯太太，我真的不想回家。山里肯定很好玩的，如果真的像摩根说得那样下了大雪，我们就能玩雪了！”
“是的是的，”安妮恳求道，“我们在山上一定会很安全，而且肯定非常快乐。我们保证一旦出现任何情况就立刻回来。”
“我会照顾好大家的。”朱利安抬头挺身，以大哥哥的口吻说道。
“好吧，好吧！这鬼主意你们都敢想，”琼斯太太一边说一边往回走，“我得去跟摩根谈谈。你们现在坐下来吃饭吧，让摩根来决定好了！”
说罢，琼斯太太走出了房间，摇了摇头，撇了撇嘴。没有火炉！没有热饭！没人管着他们！这些孩子在这个鬼天气里，在山上要怎么度过啊！
五个小伙伴围在餐桌前，开始吃晚餐。乔治让蒂米也坐到了椅子上，不时拿一些残食喂它。蒂米表现乖巧，非常听话。
“我都想让蒂米帮我递一盘菜过来了！”安妮打趣说，“亲爱的蒂米，麻烦把盐递给我。”
蒂米把爪子放到餐桌上来，就好像它真的要帮忙似的。乔治眼疾手快给它放了下去。这顿饭也太美味了吧！猪肉饼太好吃了，每个人都吃了两块，还有水煮蛋，让人回味无穷。接着，大家开始吃奶酪，连蒂米都十分喜欢。吃到最后，大家的肚子再也塞不下琼斯太太正拿来的苹果派了！
“我的天啊！我都忘了还有苹果派。”安妮看见琼斯太太拿着托盘走了进来，上面放了一个大苹果派和一壶奶油，她抱歉地说。
“琼斯太太，我们在小屋外面碰到了一个可爱的小女孩，”迪克说，“她叫艾丽，有一只羊，还有……”
“天啊，艾丽！这个古怪的家伙！”琼斯太太一边说，一边收好脏盘子，“她是牧羊人的女儿。她辍学了，离家出走，整天和小狗、小羊躲在山上。她每一年都会有一只小羊，而且小羊和她形影不离。山上连哪儿有个兔子洞、黑莓树、鸟窝，这个孩子都一清二楚。”
“我们碰到她时，她正唱着歌，”朱利安说，“婉转动听，像只鸟儿一样。”
“是的，她天生就有一副好嗓子。”琼斯太太说，“这孩子太野了，什么都干得出来。如果你责备了她，她可以接连消失好几周，没人知道她去了哪儿。如果你们上了山，别让她靠近那间小屋，她很有可能会来偷东西。”
“对了！小屋！您跟摩根商量这件事情了吗？”迪克问道，满眼期待。
“是的，谈过了，”琼斯太太回答，“他说可以让你们上山。他也不想让自己的狗再惹出麻烦。他说马上就要下大雪了，如果你们能保证自己的安全，住在上面玩雪橇也确实是绝好的机会！他会帮你们把雪橇运上去的。”
“太棒了！谢谢！”朱利安说，孩子们都挂上了笑脸，你看看我，我看看你，“琼斯太太，太感谢您了！我们明天吃了早餐就出发！”
明天！早餐后动身！独自去山间小屋生活，就他们五个！简直完美！
Chapter 8 OFF TO THE LITTLE HUT
Chapter 8 OFF TO THE LITTLE HUT
Julian and Dick were so sleepy after their long day in the cold air, and their enormous meal, that theycould not keep their eyes open for long.
'Go to bed, both of you!' said Anne, seeing them lying tired out in their chairs, when Mrs. Jones hadcleared away everything.
'Yes. I think we'd better,' said Julian, staggering up. 'Oh, my legs! They're as stiff as sticks! Goodnight, you two girls, and Timmy. See you tomorrow - if we wake up!'
The two boys stumbled up the stone stairs to bed. George and Anne stayed downstairs, talking andreading. Timmy lay on the hearthrug, listening, his ears twitching towards Anne when she spoke, andthen towards George as she answered. This little habit of his always made them laugh.
'It's exactly as if he was listening, but too lazy to join in our conversation!' said Anne. 'Oh, George - Ireally am glad you're not going home tomorrow. It would be the first time you'd ever done a thinglike that! I'd just have had to come with you!'
'Don't let's talk about it,' said George. 'I feel rather ashamed of making such a fuss now. All the sameI shall be terrified if I see any of those dogs again when I'm with Timmy. What a bit of luck the boyswent up to that hut today, Anne - we'd never have known about it if they hadn't.'
'Yes. It sounds fun,' said Anne. 'Don't let's be too late to bed, George. It will be quite a pull up themountainside tomorrow, with all our things!'
George went to the window.
'It's snowing hard,' she said. 'Just as Morgan said it would. I don't like him, do you?'
'Oh - I think he's all right,' said Anne. 'And what a voice he's got! He nearly made me jump out of myskin when he called his three dogs. He must have the loudest voice in the world!'
'Timmy - you're yawning!' said George, as Timmy opened his mouth widely and made a yawningnoise. 'How's your neck?'
33
Timmy was getting rather tired of having his neck examined. He lay still while George had anotherlook at it.
'Healing beautifully!' she said. 'You'll be quite all right tomorrow. Will you like going off to that hutall by ourselves, Tim?'
Timmy gave her a loving lick and yawned again. Then he got up and trotted over to the door that ledto the stone stairs, looking back enquiringly at George.
'Right. We're coming,' said George, laughing, and she and Anne blew out the lamp on the table, andfollowed Timmy up the stairs. They peeped in at the boys' room - and saw Julian and Dick absolutelysound asleep, dead to the world!
'A thunderstorm wouldn't wake them tonight!' said Anne. 'Come on - let's buck up and get into bedourselves. We've a nice wood-fire again, and I shall undress in front of it. Move over, Timmy, I wantto stand on the rug.'
In the morning the world was very white indeed! As Morgan had prophesied, the snow had fallenthickly in the night, and everywhere was covered in a thick white blanket, that gleamed and sparkledin the weak January sun.
'This is something like!' said Dick, as he looked out of his bedroom window. 'Get up, Ju - it's amarvellous morning! Remember, we've got to take all our things up to that hut today! Do stiryourself!'
Mrs. Jones gave them a fine breakfast - eggs, bacon and sausages.
'It's the last hot meal you'll have, if you're going up to that hut,' she said. 'Though you'll be able tocook eggs in the little saucepan up there, if you set it on top of the oil-stove. And mind you don't getplaying about round that stove when it's alight, or the whole place might go up in flames!'
'We'll be very careful,' promised Julian. 'I'll send anyone back if they upset the stove - yes, I will, sojust look out, Timmy!'
'Woof!' said Tim, amiably. He was pleasantly excited with all the preparations for going, and ransniffing from one parcel to another.
The children were not taking all their things, of course, but Mrs. Jones had made them pack acomplete change of clothes each, besides their warmest night-clothes and dressing-gowns. They hadtorches too, and plenty of rope for hauling things up and down the hills. And also they had 34six loaves of new-baked bread, a large cheese, about three dozen eggs and a ham. So they were trulywell provided for.
'And there's plenty of butter packed in with the loaves,' said Mrs. Jones, 'and a large pot of cream. I'lltry and send up some milk if the shepherd comes down. He'll pass the hut when he goes up again.
There's only a quart in that bottle there - but you'll find plenty of orangeade and lemonade in the hut -and you can boil snow if you want to make cocoa or tea!'
It was quite clear that Mrs. Jones had no idea how many times the Five had gone off on their own!
They smiled and winked at one another, and took all her advice in good part. She really was so kind,so very concerned about them all. She even packed some bones and dog biscuits for Timmy!
'Here's my Morgan now,' said Mrs. Jones, when every single thing had been put in a pile outside thefront door, toboggans and skis as well. 'He's brought his snow-slide with him, to take all your goods.'
The snow-slide was like a long, flat cart with runners instead of wheels - an elongated sleigh.
The children piled on to it all the parcels, and two suit-cases. They were all going to walk up as thesnow was not yet too thick. Timmy danced round in great excitement - though both he and Georgekept a wary eye out for the other dogs, and Timmy did not venture very far from George.
The giant like Morgan arrived, his breath puffing before him like a smoke-cloud! He nodded at thechildren.
'Morning,' he said, and that was all. He took hold of the ropes at the front of the snow-slide and ranthem over his shoulders.
'I'll take one,' said Julian. 'It's much too heavy for one person to pull!'
'Ha!' said Morgan, scornfully, and walked off with the two ropes over his shoulder. The snow-slidefollowed easily.
'Strong as a horse, my Morgan is,' said old Mrs. Jones, proudly.
'Strong as ten horses!' said Julian, wishing he was as big and as strong as the broad-shoulderedfarmer.
George said nothing. She hadn't yet forgiven the farmer for being scornful about Timmy's bite theday before. She followed the others, carrying her skis, and waved to kind old Mrs. Jones as she stoodanxiously watching them leave.
35
It seemed a long trek up the mountainside, when things had to be pulled or carried! Morgan wentfirst, pulling the big snow-slide easily. Julian went next, pulling a toboggan and carrying his skis.
Dick was next with another toboggan and skis, and the girls came last with their skis only.
Timmy ran at the front or the back as he liked, enjoying everything.
Morgan said nothing at all. Julian addressed a few polite remarks to him, and received a grunt inreply, but that was all. He looked curiously at the great, strong fellow, wondering about him and hissilence. He looked intelligent and even kindly - but he seemed so dour and rough in his manners andbehaviour! Oh well - they would soon say good-bye to him and be on their own!
They came at last to the little hut. The girls ran ahead to it, exclaiming in delight. George lookedthrough the windows.
'Oh - it's a proper little house inside! Oh, look at those bunks on the walls! And there's even a carpeton the floor! Quick, Julian, where's the key?'
'Morgan's got it,' said Julian, and they all stood by and waited while Morgan unlocked the door forthem.
'Thanks so much for helping to bring up our things,' said Julian, politely. 'Awfully good of you.'
Morgan grunted, but looked pleased.
'Shepherd comes by at times,' he said, in his great deep voice, and the Five felt quite surprised to hearhim saying even a short sentence to them! 'He'll take messages for you if you so want.'
And with that he set off down the hill back to the farm, with enormous, swinging steps, like a giantfrom an old-time tale.
'He's queer,' said Anne, looking after him. 'I don't know if I like him or not.'
'What does it matter?' said Dick. 'Come on, Anne, old girl, give a hand. There's plenty to do.
What about you and George seeing what blankets and things are in those cupboards, and making upsome beds for tonight.'
Anne loved that kind of thing, though George didn't. She would much rather have carried in thethings as the boys were doing. But she went to the cupboards with Anne, and examined all theircontents with much interest.
'Plenty of rugs and blankets and pillows,' said Anne. 'And enough china and cutlery for half a dozenfamilies too! I suppose old Mrs. Jones has dozens of people here in the summer! George, I'll put thefood away, if you'll see to the beds.'
36
'Right,' said George, and went to make up four of the bunk-beds. There were six of these altogether,in rows of three - three on one wall, three on another, one above the other. George was soonstruggling with blankets and pillows, while Anne set out the food they had brought with them,arranging it neatly on the cupboard shelves. Then she went to look at the stove to see if it had oil in it,for it would be very cold that night.
'Yes, it's full,' she said. 'I'll light it tonight, because I expect we'll be out as long as it's daylight, won'twe, Dick?'
'Rather!' said Dick, unpacking some of the things out of his suit-case. 'By the way, there's a littlewooden bunker outside, with a can of extra oil and an enamel jug. I suppose the jug's for fetchingwater from some spring or other in the summer-time - but we can easily melt snow for water.
Will you two girls be long, Anne?'
'No. We've almost finished,' said Anne. 'Do you want something to eat before we go? Or shall wetake some bread and ham with us, and have a good meal when we come back?'
'Oh, take some sandwiches,' said Julian. 'I don't want to stop for a meal. Besides, we can't be hungryyet. Make sandwiches, Anne - and we'll take some of those apples with us too!'
The sandwiches were quickly made, and the boys filled their pockets with apples. Timmy dancedround in delight.
'You won't be quite so pleased, Tim, when you find yourself in deep snow!' said Dick. 'I wonder ifhe'll like travelling down the hill on a toboggan, George!'
'Oh, he'll love it!' said George. 'Won't you, Tim? Are we ready? Well, lock the door, Ju, and off we'llgo!'
8.去山间小屋
去山间小屋
朱利安和迪克今天在户外待的时间太长，回来又紧接着饱餐了一顿，他们真的困得睁不开眼了。
“你们去睡吧！”安妮看见他们都躺在椅子上，一副累坏了的样子。这时候琼斯太太正在收拾餐桌。
“是的，我们该去睡了，”朱利安一边说，一边站起来，“老天，我的腿！它们现在就像棍子一样僵硬！晚安，女孩们，晚安，蒂米。明天再见，如果我们醒得来的话！”
两个男孩子跌跌撞撞上了楼。乔治和安妮还待在楼下，时而说说话，时而看看书。蒂米惬意地躺在壁炉边的地毯前，安静地聆听。每当安妮或乔治说话的时候，它就向谁竖起耳朵。它的这个习惯总能博得大家的欢笑。
“它总是摆出一副认真倾听，但又懒得加入我们的谈话的样子！”安妮说，“对了，乔治，你明天不回家真的太好了！这是你第一次遇到这种危险，如果你一定要回家，我一定会陪着你的！”
“不要再说了，”乔治说，“现在想想，我真的很不好意思。但如果我和蒂米又碰到那些狗的话，我还是会很害怕。他们两个今天去了山上的小屋，对我来说真是太幸运了。安妮，如果他们没去，我们就永远不知道那个地方怎么样。”
“是的，听起来很有趣，”安妮说，“乔治，我们也早点睡。明天要带着所有行李上山，肯定不简单。”
乔治走到窗前：“现在外面正如摩根所说，下着鹅毛大雪。但我不太喜欢他，你呢？”
“我觉得他还好，”安妮说，“不过他那个嗓门是真的大！他一呼唤那三只狗，叫声吓得我直起鸡皮疙瘩。他的声音肯定是世界上最响亮的！”
“蒂米，你都在打哈欠了！”乔治看见蒂米张大嘴，发出了个慵懒的声音，“你脖子好些了吗？”
蒂米已经厌倦了被反复检查脖子，所以，乔治再一次来检查的时候，它一动不动。
“愈合得很好！”她说，“明天就没大碍了。蒂米，明天我们将独自去那间小屋，你会喜欢吗？”
蒂米满眼关爱，舔了舔她，接着又打了个哈欠。然后，它起身快速走到石梯口，回头眼巴巴地望着乔治。
“好的，我们来了。”乔治一边说，一边笑。于是，她和安妮吹灭了桌上的煤油炉，和蒂米一起上楼了。她们透过门缝，看见朱利安和迪克睡得酣畅淋漓，对门外发生的一切全然不知。
“真是雷打不动啊！”安妮说，“走吧，我们也加快节奏，上床睡觉吧！房里的火生得真旺，我应该站在壁炉前换衣服。另外，蒂米也想站在毯子上面。”
早晨醒来，整个世界一片银装素裹！正如摩根预报的那样，大雪下了一夜，到处白茫茫一片，像是裹了一条厚厚的白毛毯，在一片微弱的阳光中闪闪发光。
“这才是一场像样的大雪！”迪克看向窗外，激动地说，“朱利安，快起来！太奇妙了！你可要想好，我们今天可得把所有行李都搬到山间小屋里去！自己的事情自己干！”
琼斯太太为他们准备了丰盛的早餐：鸡蛋、培根、香肠。
“如果你们要去小屋，这就是你们吃得最后一顿热腾腾的饭了，”她说，“小屋里有个锅，你们把它放到油炉子顶部，也可以煮鸡蛋吃。不过，千万要注意，炉子点着的时候，你们不能在它周围玩闹，不然可能会引发火灾！”
“我们一定会小心的，”朱利安坚定地说，“如果有谁乱用炉子，我就马上把它或者他或者她送回来！我一定说到做到，所以，蒂米你可要小心了！”
“汪！”蒂米温顺地回应。所有的人都在为上山收拾准备着，蒂米高兴得摇头晃脑，在行李堆中来回打转。
当然，孩子们也不会把所有的行李都带上。但是除了带上保暖衣、睡衣，琼斯太太让他们把所有的换洗衣物都打包了。他们还带了火把，以及运送行李上山下山用的绳子。还有一些吃的：六条新烤的面包，一大块奶酪，三打鸡蛋，一根大火腿。所以，一切已经准备就绪。
“面包里还装了许多黄油，”琼斯太太补充说，“还有一大罐奶油。如果牧羊人下山来，我会请他帮忙带一些牛奶上去。他上山的时候会经过小屋。瓶子里只剩一夸脱了，但是小屋里还有许多橙汁和柠檬水。如果你们想做可可或喝茶，可以用雪水来煮。”
很明显，琼斯夫人不知道这五个小伙伴有过多少次类似的经历了！他们相视一笑，互相眨了眨眼，听取了她所有的建议。她真的非常体贴，对孩子们关爱有加，甚至还专门为蒂米准备了一些骨头和饼干！
“接下来就交给摩根了，”所有物品都整理好放到了门前，旁边还放着雪橇和滑雪板，琼斯太太说，“他拿来了滑雪车，好把所有的东西运上去。”
滑雪车就像一个长长的扁平的马车，上面装着条状滑行装置而不是轮子——简直就是一个加长版的雪橇。孩子们把所有包裹及两个行李箱放了上去。他们打算趁着积雪还不算太厚的时候，赶紧上山。蒂米高兴地转着圈，但是乔治和它还是十分警惕，生怕再碰上那三只狗，蒂米始终围在乔治身边，没有跑远。
巨人摩根到了，他呼出的气儿就像云雾一样在他面前“噗噗”地冒着！他朝孩子们点了点头。
摩根友好地对孩子们说了句：“早上好。”他抓住滑雪车前面的绳子，把它放到了自己的肩头。
“我也来帮忙！”朱利安说，“这太沉了，一个人拉不动！”
“哈！”摩根哼哧了一下，然后把两条绳子都放到了肩膀上。滑雪板轻松地向前滑动。
“我的摩根可是力大如牛！”琼斯太太骄傲地说。
“力大如十头牛！”朱利安一边说，一边幻想着自己也能像这个肩膀宽阔的农夫一样高大强壮。
乔治默不作声，看来她还没原谅昨天蒂米被咬之后，摩根的漠不关心。她跟在其他人后面，拿着自己的滑雪板。琼斯太太站在一旁，看着大家动身上山，眼里满是担忧，孩子们转过身来朝她挥手告别。
需要拉东西或扛东西上山的时候，跋涉山路似乎更加艰难了。
摩根走在第一个，轻松地拉着大滑雪车。朱利安紧跟其后，拉着一个雪橇和自己的滑雪板。然后是迪克，他也拉了一个雪橇和滑雪板，女孩们跟在后面，只拿了自己的滑雪板。蒂米时而跑向前去，时而又退到后面，乐在其中，无法自拔。
摩根一路上一言不发。朱利安跟他说了几句客套话，但摩根只是哼了两句了事。朱利安好奇地看着这位巨大、强壮的家伙，思考着他和他的沉默。摩根看上去很聪明也很友好，但在为人处世上却显得如此倔强和粗鲁！算了，反正他们很快就会和他告别，独自玩乐了。
最终，大家顺利抵达小屋。女孩们尖叫着跑向前去。乔治透着窗户饶有兴致地往里面看。
“这里面真是一个小屋子！快看墙边的床铺！地板上竟然还有地毯！朱利安，快，钥匙在哪儿？”
“在摩根那里。”朱利安说罢，他们都乖乖站在一旁，耐心等待摩根开门。
“非常感谢您帮忙把行李搬上来，”朱利安有礼貌地说，“您真是太好了！”
摩根哼了一声，但看起来很开心。
“牧羊人偶尔会来，”他声音低沉地回答，五个小伙伴听见摩根居然回话了，简直惊讶极了！“如果你们有什么需要，拜托他捎口信给我们就好。”
说完，他便启程下山了。摩根迈着巨大的步子，身子摇摇晃晃，像极了古代神话里的巨人。
“他真古怪，”安妮看着摩根远去的背影，“我也不知道自己是喜欢他，还是讨厌他。”
“这又有什么关系呢？”迪克说，“来吧，安妮，过来搭把手，还有很多事情要做呢。你和乔治去柜子里看看有什么毯子之类的东西，然后铺一铺床。”
安妮很喜欢干这种事，但乔治不喜欢。乔治宁愿像个男孩一样，去把东西搬进屋子里来。但她还是和安妮一起进屋了，并兴致盎然地检查了柜子里所有的东西。
“有许多地毯、毛毯、枕头，”安妮大声说，“还有够六个人用的瓷具和餐具！我想夏天的时候，琼斯太太在这里至少一次性接待过六个人！乔治，如果你不介意铺床的话，我就去把食物放好。”
“好的。”乔治说，然后准备去铺四张床。其实一共有六个双层床，三个一排，分别靠着两边的墙。乔治很快就开始整理毛毯和枕头了，此时安妮在一旁收拾带来的食物，把它们整整齐齐地摆到柜子的架子上。放完了食物，安妮走到炉子边查看里面是否有燃油，要是没有的话今晚肯定非常冷。
“还好，燃油是满的！”她说，“我们等晚上再点燃它，因为只要是白天，我们几乎都会在外面，对吧，迪克？”
“你说得对！”迪克一边说，一边取出行李箱中的物品，“顺便说一下，屋外有个木制小仓库，里面放了一罐备用的燃油和一个搪瓷壶。我想这个壶应该是春天或者夏天的时候，用来打水的，但是我们现在可以直接取用雪水。安妮，你们还要很久才收拾完吗？”
“不，我们马上就好了，”安妮说，“出门之前，你们想吃点东西，还是随身带点面包和火腿充饥，等回来了之后再饱餐一顿呢？”
“那带点三明治吧，”朱利安说，“我不想因为一顿饭而半途而废。再说了，我现在一点都不饿。安妮，做些三明治吧。我们两个男孩会再带上几个苹果。”
三明治很快就做好了，男孩们往口袋里装满了苹果。蒂米快乐得直转圈。
“蒂米，等你陷到厚厚的积雪中的时候，就再也高兴不起来了！”迪克说，“乔治，可以让蒂米滑雪橇跟着我们，不知道它喜不喜欢！”
“对啊！蒂米肯定会喜欢的！”乔治说，“对吧，蒂米！大家都准备好了吗？朱利安，锁上门，我们出发吧！”
Chapter 9 A STRANGE TALE
Chapter 9 A STRANGE TALE
The children did not bother about their skis that first day. For one thing the snow was not quite thickor smooth enough for skiing, and for another thing they longed for the swift excitement oftobogganing. Dick took George on his toboggan and Julian took Anne on his. Timmy wouldn't comeon either of them.
37
'Race you to the bottom!' Julian shouted. 'One, two, three, go!' And away they went, swishing overthe clean white snow at top speed, shouting with laughter.
Julian won easily, because Dick's toboggan caught on a root or small bush under the snow, whichupset it very suddenly. Dick and George were flung headlong into the snow, and sat up, blinking, andspitting out the cold snow from their mouths.
Timmy was terribly excited. He came plunging down the hillside after the toboggans, annoyed at theway his legs went into the snow, barking madly. He was most astonished to see Dick and George flyinto the air when their toboggan upset, and pranced round them, licking them and leaping on them ina most aggravating way.
'Oh, get away, Timmy!' said Dick, trying to get up, and being knocked down again by the exciteddog. 'Go and knock George over, not me! Call him, George!'
Pulling the toboggans back up the hill was a tiring job - but the swift flight down over the snow wasworth all the pullings-up! The four children soon had glowing faces and tingling limbs, and wishedthey could throw off their coats and scarves!
'I can't pull up our toboggan one more time!' said Anne, at last. 'I really can't. You'll have to pull it upyourself, Julian, if you want to toboggan any more.'
'Well, I do want to - but my legs will hardly walk up the hill now,' said Julian, panting. 'Hey, Dick -Anne and I have had enough. We'll go up and eat our sandwiches at the top of the slope, where wecan watch you.'
The other two soon joined them, and Timmy was glad to sit down too. His long pink tongue hung outof his mouth, and he puffed his white breath out like rolling mist! At first he had been puzzled bywhat he thought was 'smoke' coming out of his mouth so continually, but now, seeing that everyonewas apparently puffing it out too, he didn't worry!
The Five sat at the top of the slope, eating their sandwiches hungrily, very glad of the rest. Juliangrinned round at them all.
'Pity Mother can't see us now!' he said. 'We look marvellous! And nobody's coughed once. I bet we'llbe stiff tomorrow though!'
Dick was looking across the slope to the opposite hill, rising steeply up a mile or so away.
'There's that building I thought I saw yesterday,' he said. 'Isn't that a chimney sticking up?'
'You've got sharp eyes!' said George. 'Nobody could surely see a building as far away as that, whenthe snow is on it!'
38
'Did we bring the field-glasses?' asked Julian. 'Where are they? We could soon find out if there's ahouse there or not, if we look through those.'
'I put them into a cupboard,' said Anne, getting up. 'Ooooh, I'm stiff! I'll just go and get them.'
She soon came back with the glasses and handed them to Dick. He put them to his eyes and adjustedthem, till they were properly focused on the far-away hill opposite.
'Yes,' he said. 'I was right. It is a building - and I'm pretty sure it must be Old Towers, too. You know- the place we went to by mistake two nights ago when we lost our way.'
'Let's have a look,' said Anne. 'I think I might recognise it. I caught a glimpse of the towers when weswung round a corner on the way up Old Towers Hill.'
She put the glasses to her eyes and gazed through them. 'Yes. I'm sure that's the place,' she said.
'Wasn't it queer - that big rude notice on the gate - and that fiercely barking dog - and nobody about!
How lonely the old lady must be living there all by herself!'
As they sat there, nibbling their apples, Timmy suddenly began to bark. He stood up, turning his headtowards the path that ran higher up the hill.
'Perhaps it's Aily, that funny child, coming,' said Julian, hopefully. But it wasn't. It was a small, wiry-looking woman, a shawl over her head, neatly-dressed, walking swiftly.
She didn't seem very surprised to see the children. She stopped and said 'Good day'.
'You'll be the boys my Aily was telling me of last night,' she said. 'Are you staying in the Jones'
hut?'
'Yes,' said Julian. 'We were staying at the farm first - but our dog didn't get on with the others, sowe've come up here. It's fine. Marvellous view, too!'
'If you see that Aily of mine, you tell her not to stay out tonight,' said the woman, wrapping her shawlmore tightly round her. 'Her and her lamb! She's as mad as the old lady in the house yonder!' and shepointed in the direction of Old Towers.
'Oh - do you know anything about that old place?' asked Julian, at once. 'We went to it by mistake,and...'
'Well, you didn't get into it, I'll be bound,' said Aily's mother. 'Notices on the gate and all! And tothink I used to go up there three times a week, and never anything but kindness shown me! And nowold Mrs. Thomas, she won't see a soul except those friends of her son's. Poor old lady - she's out ofher mind, so they say. Must be - or she'd see me, that waited on her for years!'
This was all very interesting.
39
'Why do they say 'Keep Out' on the gates?' asked Julian. 'They've a fierce dog there, too.'
'Ah well, young sir, you see some of the old lady's friends would like to know what's going on,'
said Aily's mother. 'But nobody can do a thing. It's a queer place now - with noises at night - andmists - and shimmerings - and...'
Julian began to think this was an old wives' tale, made up because the villagers were angry that theywere now kept out of the big old house. He smiled.
'Oh, you may smile, young man,' said the woman, sounding cross. 'But ever since last October, there'squeer doings there. And what's more, vans have been there in the dead of night. What for, I'd like toknow? Well, if you ask me, I reckon they've been taking away the poor old thing's belongings -furniture and pictures and such. My poor old Madam - she was sweet and kind, and now I don't knowwhat's happening to her!'
There were tears in the woman's eyes, and she hastily brushed them away.
'I shouldn't be telling you all this - you'll be scared sleeping here alone at night now.'
'No - no, we shan't,' Julian assured her, amused that she should think that a village tale might frightenthem. 'Tell us about Aily. Isn't she frozen, going about with so few clothes on?'
'That child! She's fey, I tell you,' said Aily's mother. 'Runs about the hills like a wild thing - playstruant from school - goes to see her father - he's shepherd, up yonder where the sheep are - anddoesn't come home at nights. You tell her there's a good whipping waiting for her at home if shedoesn't come back tonight. She's like her father, she is - likes to be alone all the time - talks to thelambs and the dogs like they were human - but never a word to me!'
The children began to feel uncomfortable, and wished they hadn't spoken to the grumbling gossipywoman. Julian got up.
'Well - if we see Aily, we'll certainly tell her to go home - but not about the whipping, because Iexpect she wouldn't go home then,' he said. 'If you pass by the farmhouse will you be kind enough tostep in and tell Mrs. Jones we are quite all right, and enjoying ourselves very much?
Thank you!'
The woman nodded her head, muttered something, and went off down the hill, walking as swiftly asbefore.
'She said some queer things,' said Dick, staring after her. 'Was that a silly village-tale she told us- or do you suppose there's something in it, Ju?'
40
'Oh - a village tale of course!' said Julian, sensing that Anne hadn't liked it much. 'What a strangefamily - a shepherd who spends all his time on the hills - a child who wanders about the countrysidewith a lamb and a dog - and a mother who stops and tells such angry tales to strangers!'
'It's getting dark,' said Dick. 'I vote we go in and light the oil-lamp and get the hut warm - and lightthe table-lamp too. It'll be cosy in there. I'm feeling a bit chilled now, sitting out here so long.'
'Well, don't begin to cough,' said Julian, 'or you'll set us all off! Indoors, Tim! Come on!'
Soon they were all in the hut, the oil-lamp giving out a lovely warmth and glow, and the table-lampshining brightly.
'We'll play a game, shall we?' said Dick. 'And have a sort of high tea later. Let's have a silly game -snap, or something!'
So they sat down to play - and soon Dick's cards had all been 'snapped' by the others. He yawned andwent to the window, looking out into the darkness that hid all the snowy hills. Then he stood tense fora moment, staring in surprise. He spoke to the others without turning.
'Quick! Come here, all of you! Tell me what you make of this! Did you ever see such anextraordinary thing! QUICK!'
9.这只是一个传说？
这只是一个传说？
孩子们第一天并没有尽情地玩滑雪板，一是因为雪不够厚，也不够光滑；二是因为他们想更刺激点，玩速度更快的雪橇。乔治坐在迪克的雪橇上，安妮坐在朱利安的雪橇上，只剩蒂米孤零零一个。
“我们来比赛，看谁先滑到底！”朱利安大叫，“一、二、三，出发！”霎时间，他们就如同离弦的箭，一飞而出。雪橇满载欢声笑语，在皑皑白雪上飞驰而过。
朱利安赢了，轻而易举。因为迪克的雪橇在半路上被雪里的树根还是灌木给绊倒了，迪克和乔治摔了个人仰马翻，摔进了雪地里，他们赶紧坐起来，一边眨巴着眼，一边吐出嘴巴里的雪。
蒂米异常兴奋。它跟在雪橇后面，紧追不舍。但使它烦心的是，一路上它的腿不断陷进雪地里，于是生气地乱叫。当看到迪克和乔治摔了出去，腾空高飞的场景，蒂米惊讶极了，激动地在他们周围跳来跳去，不断地舔舐他们，兴奋地往他们身上扑。
“蒂米，快走开！”迪克试着站起来，却又被这只激动异常的狗给扑倒了，“快去扑乔治，别光找我呀！乔治，你快叫它过去！”
把雪橇拉回山顶是一个苦力活，但一想到从山顶上一滑而下的快感，一切都是值得的！尽管四个孩子冻得四肢都快麻木了，他们脸上依然容光焕发，神采奕奕，还想着要脱下外套和围巾！
“我拉不动了！”安妮说，“真的拉不动了。朱利安，如果你还要滑的话，得你自己拉雪橇上山了！”
“嗯，其实我还想继续！但是我的腿实在不允许。”朱利安喘着粗气，“喂，迪克！我和安妮不玩了，我们打算去山坡上吃三明治，在那里我们可以看到你。”
另外两个小伙伴很快也加入了他们，蒂米也很开心能坐下休息会儿。它伸出长长的舌头，大口喘着气，呼出的热气就像缕缕薄雾渐渐升起！起初，它很困惑这“烟”为什么会从它嘴里不断吹出来，但现在，它看到人人如此，也就不再担心了！
小伙伴们坐在斜坡上，狼吞虎咽地吃着三明治，放眼望去，美景尽收眼底，朱利安朝着大家咧嘴一笑，说：
“可惜妈妈看不到！现在我们个个精神十足，没人再咳嗽了。但我敢打赌，我们明天肯定全身酸痛！”
迪克往对面的山坡望去，那个斜坡延伸了大约有一英里长。
“那是我昨天看到的建筑吧！”他说，“你们看，那是个耸立的烟囱吗？”
“你眼神可真好！”乔治说，“隔这么远，到处白茫茫一片，也没人能认出来这是一座房子了。”
“我们不是带了野外望远镜吗？”朱利安说，“放哪儿了？如果我们用望远镜看的话，很快就能知道真相了！”
“我放到一个柜子里了，”安妮一边说，一边站起身，“天啊，我都快冻僵了！我回去找找，然后拿过来！”
很快，安妮把望远镜拿了过来，交给了迪克。迪克把它放在眼前，做了些调整，以保证能清楚看见对面的山林。
“是的，”他说，“我说对了，那是栋房子。而且我敢肯定，那一定是古塔。就是两天前的晚上，我们迷路后误打误撞去的那个地方。”
“让我看看，”安妮说，“我想我也认得出。我们当晚去古塔的路上，经过拐弯处，我瞥见了它。”
安妮拿过望远镜，透过望远镜目不转睛地看向远处。“是的，我也能肯定这就是那个地方，”她说，“大家不觉得奇怪吗？大门口醒目又无礼的警示、穷凶极恶的狗、一个人影也没有！那里面独居生活的老太太肯定特别孤独。”
他们坐在那里，一口一口地啃着苹果。这时，蒂米突然大叫起来。它站起身，转过头，对着往山上走去的那条小路。
“或许是那个有趣的孩子——艾丽来了。”朱利安说着，满是期待。但事实并非如此，来的是一位个子小小、块头结实的女士，她头上围了块披肩，穿戴整洁，走得飞快。
看到这群孩子，她似乎一点也不惊讶。“下午好。”她停下脚步对孩子们说。
“你们肯定就是艾丽昨晚跟我说的男孩们吧，”她说，“你们住在琼斯太太的小屋里吗？”
“是的，”朱利安回答说，“我们刚开始是待在农场里，但是我们的狗和农场里的狗相处得不是很愉快，所以我们就到这里来了。这里也很不错，风景优美！”
“如果你们看到我的艾丽，麻烦帮我转告她不要夜不归宿，”女人说道，一边裹紧了自己的披肩，“她自己！还有她的小羊！她简直跟那里面的老太太一样疯，一样不可理喻！”她伸手往古塔的方向指了指。
“您了解那个古老的地方吗？”朱利安立刻追问道，“我们偶然间去了一次，但是……”
“我猜你们肯定没进到里面。”艾丽的妈妈说，“我能想象到那大门前的警告以及发生的一切！回头想想，在过去我一周可以去三次，那里的主人待人友好、热情好客！但是现在，托马斯太太，除了她儿子的朋友，她谁也不愿意见。所以他们说她是个可怜人哪，失去了理智。一定是这样的，不然她至少也会见见我，毕竟我照顾了她那么多年。”
这一切听上去都很有趣。
“为什么在门口贴‘勿入’的警示呢？”朱利安问道，“他们还养了一只恶狗。”
“好吧，小朋友，老太太的朋友们都想弄个究竟，”艾丽的妈妈说，“但大家都无能为力。那个地方越来越奇怪了，晚上有许多噪音、迷雾、哀号，还有……”
朱利安以为这纯属无稽之谈，大概是村民们被拒之门外后，愤怒驱使他们编造了这些故事。于是，他笑了笑。
“小朋友，你笑什么！”女人有点生气地说，“自从去年十月以来，怪异的事情接二连三。而且，在深更半夜，经常会有货车停在门外。那是为什么？如果你非要问，我想是他们拿走了老太太的财产：家具、书画，等等，我可怜的老太太啊，她曾经是那么的友好善良，简直不敢想象她都经历了什么！”
女人的眼里噙着泪水，她快速地抹了一把擦干净了，接着说：
“我不该告诉你们这些的，你们晚上肯定都不敢睡觉了。”
“没关系，不会的，”朱利安细心安慰她，没想到她竟然以为一个村庄谣传就能吓着他们，“跟我们说说艾丽吧。她只穿着几件单薄的衣服到处游荡，难道不冷吗？”
“那个孩子！我跟你们说，她就是一个怪小孩。”艾丽的妈妈说，“像个野人一样在山上乱窜，逃学不上课，就为了去找爸爸。她爸爸是个牧羊人，整天都待在山上守着羊，直到半夜才回家。如果你们碰上她，还帮我转告她，如果今天晚上还不按时回家，就等着回家挨鞭子。她和她爸爸很像，大多数时间都喜欢一个人待着，和羊群、和狗狗说话，视它们为知己，但跟我却讲不上两句话！”
听着这些，孩子们感觉很厌恶，反倒希望没遇到过这个爱嚼舌根又斤斤计较的妇人。朱利安站起身来说：
“好的，如果我们看见艾丽的话，一定会转告她让她按时回家的，但鞭子的事我就不说了，一提这个她肯定就不想回家了。如果您路过琼斯太太的家门前，还烦请您告知她一声我们在山上过得很愉快，大家状态都很好。谢谢您。”
女人点点头，喃喃嘀咕了几句，然后就下山了，走路依旧步履生风。
“她说了些奇怪的事情，”迪克盯着女人远去的背影，说，“你们认为她所说的是个荒唐的乡村传说呢，还是确实有几分依据？”
“还用得着思考吗，当然就是个传说啦！”朱利安说道，他感觉到安妮有些心情不悦，“这个家庭太奇怪了吧！牧羊人整天都待在山上，家中的孩子整天和一只羊、一只狗在山上乱晃，而这位妈妈又轻易把村里的秘密告诉陌生人！”
“天快黑了，”迪克说，“我提议我们快回小屋，然后点亮小油炉，好让屋子暖和点，顺便也点亮台灯。小屋里肯定很舒服。在外面坐得太久了，我现在都有点打冷战。”
“好吧，我们不要再感冒咳嗽了，”朱利安说，“否则我们都得卷铺盖走人了！回屋吧！快起来！”
很快大家返回了小屋，小油炉散发出温暖的光，台灯也闪闪发光。
“我们来玩游戏吧，”迪克说，“然后来点下午茶？玩轻松一点的游戏，像扑克牌之类的！”
于是他们坐下来打起了扑克，很快迪克就败下阵来，被“打”得落花流水。迪克打了个哈欠走到窗户边。放眼望去，一切都笼罩在夜色中。突然，他眼前一亮，大吃一惊，头也不回地大喊起来：
“你们快来！快来！你们知道这是什么吗？简直太诡异了！快来！”
Chapter 10 IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT
Chapter 10 IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT
'What is it, Dick? What can you see?' cried George, putting down her cards as soon as she heardDick's call. Julian rushed to stand beside him at once, imagining all sorts of things. Anne went too,with Timmy leaping excitedly. They all stared out of the window, Anne half fearfully.
'It's gone!' cried Dick, in disappointment.
'But what was it?' asked George.
'I don't know. It was over there - on the opposite slope, where Old Towers is,' said Dick. 'I don't knowhow to describe it - it was like a - like a rainbow - no, not quite like that - how can I describe it?'
'Try,' said Julian, excited.
41
'Well - let me think - you know how, on a very hot day, all the air shimmers, don't you!' said Dick.
'Well that's what I saw on the hill over there - rising high into the sky and then disappearing. Ashimmering!'
'What colour?' asked Anne, amazed.
'I don't know - all colours it seemed,' said Dick. 'I don't quite know how to explain - it's somethingI've never seen before. It just came suddenly - and the shimmering rose all the way up into the sky,and then disappeared. That's all.'
'Well - that's what Aily's mother said - mists - and shimmerings,' said Julian, remembering. 'Gosh- so that wasn't just a tale she told us. There was some truth in it. But what in the wide world can thisshimmering be?'
'Had we better go back to the farm and tell them there?' asked Anne, hopefully, not at all wanting tospend the night in the hut now.
'No! They've probably heard the tale already,' said Julian. 'Besides - this is exciting. We might be ableto find out something more about it. We can easily watch Old Towers from here - it's one of the veryfew places where anyone can look straight across at it. As the crow flies, it's less than a mile away -though it's many miles by the road.'
They all gazed towards the opposite hill again, though they couldn't see it, of course, hopingsomething would happen. But nothing did happen. The sky was pitch black, for heavy clouds hadcome up - and the distant hill couldn't be seen.
'Well - I'm tired of looking out into the darkness,' said Anne, turning away. 'Let's go on with ourgame.'
'Right,' said Julian, and they all sat down again, Dick watching the others play, but occasionallyglancing out of the window into the black darkness there.
Anne was out of the game next, and she got up and went to the food cupboard.
'I think I'll start preparing a meal,' she said. 'We'll have boiled eggs, shall we, to begin with - and I'llboil a kettle too and make some cocoa - or would you rather have tea?'
'Cocoa,' said everyone, and Anne got out the tin.
'I'll want some snow, for the kettle,' she said.
'Well, there's some nice clean snow just behind the hut,' said Dick. 'Oh wait, Anne - you won't likegoing out in the dark now, will you? I'll get it! If you hear me yell, you'll know there's somethinggoing on!'
42
Timmy went out with him, much to Anne's relief. She held the kettle, waiting for the snow - and thensuddenly there came a loud yell!
'Hey! Who's that?'
Anne let go the kettle in fright, and it dropped on the floor with a crash, making the other two jumpviolently. Julian rushed to the door.
'Dick! What's up?'
Dick appeared at the doorway, grinning, with Timmy beside him.
'Nothing much. Sorry if I frightened you. But I was just scraping up some snow in the basin here,when something rushed at me, and butted me!'
'Whatever was it?' said George, startled. 'And why didn't Timmy bark?'
'Because he knew it was harmless, I suppose,' said Dick, grinning aggravatingly. 'Here, Anne -here's the snow for the kettle.'
'Dick! Don't be so annoying!' said George. 'Who was out there?'
'Well - I couldn't really see much, because I'd put my torch down to scrape up the snow,' said Dick.
'But I rather think it was Fany the lamb! It was gone before I had time to call out. I got quite a shock!'
'Fany the lamb!' said Julian. 'Well - that must mean that little Aily is about. What can she be doingout in the darkness at this time of night?'
He went to the door and called: 'Aily! Aily, if you're there, come in here and we'll give yousomething to eat.'
But there was no answering call. Nobody appeared out of the darkness, no lamb came frisking up.
Timmy stood by Julian, looking out into the darkness, his ears pricked. He had been surprised whenthe tiny lamb trotted up out of the darkness, and had had half a mind to bark. But who would bark ata lamb? Not Timmy!
Julian shut the door.
'If that kid is out there in this frosty night, with only the few clothes she had on yesterday, I shouldthink she'll catch her death of cold,' he said. 'Cheer up, Anne - and for goodness' sake, don't be scaredif you hear a noise outside or see a little face looking in at the window. It will only be that mad littleAily!'
43
'I don't want to see any faces looking in at the window, whether it's Aily or not,' said Anne, puttingsnow into the kettle. 'Honestly I think she must be mad, wandering about these snowy hills alone atnight. I don't wonder her mother was cross.'
It wasn't long before they were all sitting round the small table eating a very nice meal. Boiled eggs,laid that morning, cheese and new bread and butter, and a jar of home-made jam they found in thecupboard. They drank steaming hot cups of cocoa, into each of which Anne had ladled a spoonful ofcream.
'No King or Queen in all the world could possibly have enjoyed their meal more than I have,'
said Dick. 'Anne, shall I take the milk and cream out into the snow - they'll keep for ages out there.'
'All right. But for goodness' sake don't put them where the lamb can get them - if it was a lamb thatbutted you,' said Anne, giving them to Dick. 'And don't yell again if you can help it!'
However, Dick didn't see anything this time, nor did anything come up and butt him. He was quitedisappointed!
'I'll wash the plates and cups out in the snow tomorrow,' said Anne. 'How long are you all going tostay up? It's awfully early, I know - but I'm half asleep already! The air up here is so very strong!'
'All right. We'll all pack up,' said Julian. 'You take those two bunks over there, girls, and we'll havethese. Shall we have the little oil-stove on, or not?'
'Yes,' said Dick. 'This place will be an ice-box if we don't!'
'I'd like it on too,' said Anne. 'What with shimmerings and buttings and yellings. I feel I'd like a littlelight in the room, even if it only comes from an oil-stove!'
'Well - I know you don't believe my 'shimmerings',' said Dick. 'But I swear they're true! And what'smore, I bet we'll all see them before we leave this hut! Well - good night, girls - I'm for bed!'
In a few minutes' time the bunks were creaking as the four children settled into them. They were notas comfortable as beds, but quite good. George's bunk creaked more than anyone's.
'I suppose you've got Timmy in your bunk, making it creak like that!' said Anne sleepily. 'Well, I'mglad I'm in the bunk above yours, George. I bet Tim falls out in the night!'
One by one they fell asleep. The oil-stove burned steadily. It was turned rather low, and shadowsquivered on the ceiling and walls. And then something made Timmy's ears prick up as he lay 44asleep on George's feet. First one ear pricked up - and then the other - and suddenly Timmy sat upstraight and growled in his throat. Nobody awoke - they were all too sound asleep.
Timmy growled again and again - and then he barked sharply. 'WOOF!'
Everyone awoke at once. Timmy barked again, and George put out a hand to him.
'Sh! What's the matter? Is there someone about, Tim?'
'What's up, do you think?' said Julian, from his bunk on the other side of the room. Nobody couldhear or see anything out of the ordinary. Why was Timmy barking then?
The oil-stove was still burning, its light throwing a small round pattern of yellow on the ceiling.
It made a small cosy noise as it burned, a kind of bubbling. There was nothing else to be heard at all.
'It must be someone prowling outside,' said Dick at last. 'Shall we let Timmy go and see?'
'Well - let's lie down and see if he barks again,' said Julian. 'For all we know a mouse may have runacross the floor. Tim would bark at that just as soon as he would bark at an elephant!'
'Yes. You're right,' said George. 'All right - we'll lie down again. Timmy's lying down too. Now, forgoodness' sake, Tim, if it is a mouse somewhere, do use your common sense, and let it play if itwants to - and don't wake us up.'
Timmy licked her face. He kept his ears well up for a while. The others all went to sleep exceptAnne. She lay with her eyes open, wondering what had startled Timmy. She didn't believe it was amouse!
So it was the wakeful Anne who heard the noise when it came again. She thought at first that it wasjust a noise in her ears, the kind she often heard when she lay down to sleep, and the room was quiet.
But then she felt certain that it wasn't in her ears - it was a real noise. But what a peculiar one!
'It's a kind of deep deep grumbling noise,' thought Anne, sitting up. Timmy gave a little whine as if tosay he was hearing something again too. 'A sort of thunder-rumble, but far far below me, not above!'
It grew a little louder, and Timmy growled.
'It's all right, Tim,' whispered Anne. 'It must be far-off thunder, I think!'
But then the shuddering began! This was so astonishing that Anne didn't know what to make of it. Atfirst she thought it was herself, beginning to shiver with the cold. But no - even her bunk vibrated toher fingers when she touched the wooden side!
45
Then she really was frightened. She called out loudly.
'Julian! Dick! Wake up - something queer is happening. Do wake up!'
And Timmy began to bark again. Woof, woof, woof! WOOF, WOOF!
10.深夜
深夜
乔治听到迪克的呼喊，连忙扔下手中的牌，跑了过去，大声地问：“迪克，那是什么？你能看清楚吗？”朱利安见状也立刻跑到了迪克身边，想象了各种可能。安妮也凑了过去，蒂米一个劲儿地往上跳。他们死死趴在窗户边上，盯着外面瞧，这阵势可把安妮吓了一大跳。
“不见了！”迪克失落地大喊。
“是什么啊？”乔治问。
“我不知道，刚刚就在对面的斜坡上，就在那座古塔那里，”迪克说，“我也不知道怎么形容，它就像一弯彩虹。不不，又不是很像，该怎么形容啊？”
“你试着说说看啊。”朱利安兴奋地鼓励他。
“好，那我试试。你们想象一下，酷暑的夏日里，空气中热浪滚滚的场景！”迪克说，“那场景就跟我在对面山坡上看到的一样，上升到空中然后消失不见，还闪闪发光！”
“什么颜色呢？”安妮问，一脸震惊。
“我没看清，好像是五颜六色的，”迪克说，“我确实不知道该如何形容，是我从未见过的东西。突然就出现了，然后闪着光又突然消失在空中。就这样。”
“对了，这会不会就是艾丽妈妈所说的，像一团雾一样闪闪发光的东西？”朱利安回忆道，“天啊！所以这并不是什么乡村传说，而是真实存在的！但大千世界里，这闪闪发光的东西又是什么呢？”
“我们是不是应该回到农场，告诉琼斯太太他们？”安妮迫切地问，看上去她现在一点都不想在小屋里过夜了。
“不用，他们或许早就听过这个传说了，”朱利安说，“而且，这倒是很刺激！我们或许能挖掘出更多秘密来。这里是观察古塔的绝佳位置，轻而易举又尽收眼底。乌鸦飞过去，距离不到一英里；而如果要步行过去，怕是有好几英里。”
他们目不转睛地盯着对面的山坡，内心都渴望着能再看到那个闪闪发光的东西，但是一切归于平静，他们什么都没看到。天空漆黑一片，阴云密布，远山渐渐在视野中模糊。
“好吧，我已经盯够这片黑暗了，”安妮边说边转过身来，“我们继续玩游戏吧。”
“好吧。”朱利安也回到座位，迪克站在一边看着他们三个玩游戏，时不时瞥一眼窗外。
安妮在下一局游戏中被淘汰了，便起身去取橱柜里的食物。
“我们是不是该准备晚餐了，”她说，“就吃煮鸡蛋吧。我先来烧一壶水做可可，还是你们更想喝茶？”
“可可。”大家齐声说，于是安妮把锡壶取了出来。
“我去取些雪来烧水。”她说。
“小屋后面就有干净的雪，”迪克说，“等等，安妮，外面很黑你肯定会怕的，我去取！如果你们听见我大喊大叫，那是我在暗示你们我遇到困难了。”
蒂米和迪克一起出门了，这让安妮放心不少。她拿着水壶，等着雪。但突然，门外传来一阵大叫！“啊！什么啊？”
安妮吓得扔了手中的壶，水壶掉到地上发出一阵巨响，这把另外两个小伙伴吓得一惊！朱利安立刻跑到门口。
“迪克，怎么了？”
迪克晃到门口，一脸坏笑，蒂米跟着站在旁边。
“没什么事！抱歉，吓到你了。就在我刚才往盆子里扒雪的时候，我被什么东西撞了一下。”
“什么东西？”乔治问，一惊恐，“为什么蒂米没有叫？”
“或许蒂米知道那个东西没有什么攻击性吧！”迪克说，露出大牙，张大嘴，一阵狂笑，“安妮，这是你要的雪。”
“迪克！你这个捣蛋鬼！”乔治说，“到底是什么？”
“好吧！但我真的什么也没看见，因为我正用手电筒扒雪呢，”迪克说，“我猜是范尼那只小羊吧！我还没来得及叫它，它就已经走了。我确实被吓了一跳！”
“小羊范尼！”朱利安说，“那就是说小艾丽也在附近。天都黑了，她现在在外面干什么？”
朱利安走到门口，大声说：
“艾丽！艾丽！如果你在的话，就进来坐一坐，我们给你一些东西吃。”
但是没有任何回应。黑夜里没有任何人出现，也没有小羊现身。
蒂米站在朱利安旁边，它盯着黑夜，耳朵竖了起来。当那只小羊从黑暗中跑出来的时候，它着实很惊讶，但根本没想到要朝它大吼大叫。再说了，谁会对一只小羊大吼大叫呢？反正蒂米不会！
朱利安关上了门。
“如果那个女孩跟昨天一样，只穿了几件单薄的衣服，在这个寒夜里的山林徘徊，她肯定会染上重感冒的！”他说，“安妮，打起精神来，做好心理准备，如果你听到屋外传来什么声音，或看到一张小脸透过窗户往里面看，你千万别害怕，那一定就是小疯子艾丽！”
“我不想看到任何一张脸出现在窗户上，管她是艾丽还是多丽。”安妮一边说，一边把雪放到水壶里，“老实说，她可能是真的疯了，在这么冷的夜里瞎晃悠。她妈妈不生气才怪呢！”
没过多久，她们便坐到餐桌上吃起了晚餐。有早上琼斯太太打包的熟鸡蛋、奶酪、新烤好的面包、黄油，以及一罐他们在橱柜里找到的自制果酱。他们喝着热气腾腾的可可，贴心的安妮在每一杯可可中都放了一勺奶油。
“能吃上这等美味，我简直比世界上所有的国王和王后都更加幸运，”迪克说，“安妮，我可以把牛奶和奶油放到雪地里吗？这样它们就能储存更久了。”
“好吧！但是你千万不要放到小羊够得着的地方。”安妮一边说，一边把牛奶和奶油交给了迪克，“如果刚才是小羊袭击的你，这次出门遇到自己能搞定的事，就不要再大喊大叫了。”
然而，迪克这一次什么也没看见，也没有任何东西来袭击他。
他失望极了！
“我明天用雪水洗盘子和杯子，”安妮说，“你们准备多晚睡呀？
我知道现在还很早，但是我已经昏昏欲睡了！山里的空气真的太催眠了！”
“好吧，我们洗洗睡吧，”朱利安说，“你们两个女孩睡那两个床铺，我和迪克睡这两个。我们是点着小油炉还是灭了它呢？”
“点着呀，”迪克说，“不然到了夜里，这个房间就会冷得像冰窖。”
“我同意，”安妮说，“一晚上，又是闪闪发光、又是遭受攻击、又是大喊大叫，我觉得我还是喜欢带点光的房间，就算这点微光是从小油炉里发出来的也行！”
“好吧，我知道你不想相信我所说的闪闪发光的东西，”迪克说，“但我发誓我没撒谎！而且我敢打赌，在我们离开这座小屋之前，我们所有人还会再见到它的！不说了，晚安，各位！”
过了几分钟，孩子们陆陆续续爬上了床，床铺被弄得嘎吱作响。这些铺位确实没有家里的床睡得舒服，但也不赖。其中，乔治的床响得最厉害。
“我想蒂米也爬到你的床上去了，才把床摇得这么厉害吧！”安妮慵懒地说，“还好，你的铺位在我的下面，不然夜里蒂米从床上掉下来可就麻烦了！”
孩子们一个一个相继睡去。小油炉燃着点点火光，火已经调到了最低，照得墙上、天花板上挂满了影子。突然，睡在乔治脚边的蒂米察觉到了什么动静，竖起了耳朵。它先是竖起一只耳朵听，接着又竖起了另一只，听了听动静又突然站了起来，喉咙里发出低吼。但这种低吼还不至于把大家都吵醒，每个人都睡得很沉。
蒂米低吼了一遍又一遍，最后终于大叫了一声：“汪！”
大家立刻就醒了。蒂米又叫了一声，乔治伸出手安抚它：“嘘！
怎么了？是发现有什么人了吗？”
“是觉得发生什么了？”朱利安说，他从房间另一头的床铺上坐了起来。没有人发现任何异样，为什么蒂米会叫呢？
小油炉还在燃烧，火光将一个黄色的圆点光影投掷到天花板上。燃烧的火焰发出一点点声音，冒泡一般若隐若现。此外就再没有其他声音了。
“一定是有人从外面蹿出来了，”迪克终于说话了，“我们让蒂米出去看一看吧？”
“少安毋躁，我们躺下，看看蒂米还会不会叫。”朱利安说，“我们都知道，哪怕一只老鼠从地板溜过，只要蒂米瞧见了，它都会叫，就跟见了大象会叫一样。”
“是！你说得对，”乔治说，“我们都重新躺下，蒂米也躺下。现在，为了大家好好睡觉，蒂米，你要是看见一只老鼠，请理智点不要搭理它，不要再吵醒我们了。”
蒂米舔了舔乔治的脸，还是竖起耳朵听了好长一阵子。除了安妮，其他三个小伙伴都缓缓进入睡梦中。她睁着双眼，还在想刚刚是什么惊吓到了蒂米。她不相信那只是只老鼠！
所以，当那个声音再次袭来的时候，清醒的安妮听得清清楚楚。一开始她以为是自己耳鸣了，每当她躺下准备睡觉，房间里鸦雀无声的时候，她就会耳鸣。但后来，她很明显地感觉到，这噪音不是从她耳朵里传来的，是从外面！而且是非常奇怪的噪音！
“这是一种很低很低的轰隆声，”安妮想着，坐了起来。蒂米又发出了低吼，似乎在表明它也听到了这个声音，“一种雷声般的隆隆声，但声音很低很远，也不吵！”
接着，这个声音变大了一点，蒂米也随着低吼起来。
“蒂米，别担心，”安妮轻轻说，“我想这只是远处传来的雷声！”
但是突然，周围开始震动了！一切都突如其来，搞得安妮不知所措。一开始她以为是自己冷得发抖。但显然不是！她抓着床铺的边缘，发现床也在剧烈抖动！
这时她真的害怕起来，大声叫了出来：“朱利安！迪克！快醒醒，好可怕！快醒醒！”
接着，蒂米也开始狂叫：“汪汪汪！汪汪！”
Chapter 11 STRANGE HAPPENINGS
Chapter 11 STRANGE HAPPENINGS
Everyone awoke at Anne's call. Julian thought he was in bed, and leapt out, forgetting that he was inthe top bunk. He landed with a crash on the floor, shaken and alarmed.
'Oh, Ju! You forgot you were in the top bunk!' said George, half scared and half amused. 'Are youhurt? Anne, whatever is the matter? Why did you call out? Did you see something?'
'No. I heard something - and felt something!' said Anne, glad that the others were awake. 'So didTimmy. But it's all gone now.'
'Yes, but what was it?' asked Julian, sitting on the edge of Dick's bunk, and rubbing his knee, whichhad struck the floor when he fell.
'It was a... a... well... a kind of very very deep rumbling,' said Anne. 'A deep-down rumbling -very far away. Not like thunder up in the sky. More like a thunderstorm underground! And then therewas a... a shuddering! I felt the edge of my bunk and it seemed to be sort of - well -quivering. I can't quite explain it. I was awfully scared.'
'Sounds like a small earthquake,' said Dick, wondering if Anne had dreamt all this. 'Anyway -you can't hear or feel it now, can you? You're sure you didn't dream all this, Anne?'
'Quite sure!' said Anne, 'I...' And just at that very moment it all began again! First the curiousgrumbling, muffled, and 'deep-down', as Anne had described it - then the equally strange'shuddering'. It crept through their bodies till they were all shuddering a little too, and could not stop.
'It's as if we were shivering in every part of us,' said Dick, in wonder. 'Sort of vibrating as if we hadtiny dynamo engines working inside us.'
'Yes! You've described it exactly!' said George. 'Goodness - when I put my hand on Timmy I can feelhim doing the 'shudders' - and it's just like putting my hand on something working by electricity! Youknow the sort of small vibrations you feel then.'
46
'It's gone!' said Dick, just as George finished speaking. 'I'm not 'shuddering' any more. It suddenlystopped. And I can't hear that grumbling, far-off noise now. Can you?'
Everyone agreed that both the noise and the shuddering had stopped. What in the wide world could itbe?
'It must be something to do with that curious 'shimmering' I saw in the sky over Old Towers Hilltonight,' said Dick, remembering. 'I've a good mind to go and look out of the window that faces thehill opposite, and see if it's there again.'
He leapt out of his bunk and ran to the window. At once he gave a loud cry. 'Come and look!
Whew! Just come and look!'
All the others, Timmy as well, rushed to the window at once, Timmy standing on his hind legs to see.
Certainly there was something queer to look at!
Over the hill opposite hung a mist - a curious glowing mist, that stood out in the pitch black darknessof the night! It swirled heavily, not lightly as a mist usually does.
'Look at that!' said Anne, in wonder. 'What a strange colour - not red - not yellow - not orange.
What colour is it?'
'It's not a shade I've ever seen before,' said Julian, rather solemnly. 'I call this jolly strange.
What's happening here? No wonder Aily's mother told us those stories - there's really something inthem! We'd better make a few enquiries tomorrow.'
'It's funny that both the shimmering I saw and that cloud too are over Old Towers Hill,' said Dick.
'You don't think it's something that's happening in Old Towers House, do you?'
'No. Of course not,' said Julian. 'What could happen there that would make us feel the effects here, inthis hut - that queer shuddering, for instance? And how in the world could we hear a rumbling from amile or so away, if it were not thunder? And that certainly wasn't.'
'The mist is going,' said Anne. 'Look - it's changing colour - no, it's just going darker. It's gone!'
They stood looking out for a short while longer, and then Julian felt Anne shivering violently besidehim.
'You're frozen!' he said. 'Come on, back to bed. You don't want to get another awful cold and cough.
My word - this is all very queer. But I expect there's a sensible explanation - probably there are minesaround here, and work is being done at night as well as day.'
'We'll find out,' said Dick, and they all climbed thankfully back into their bunks, feeling very cold.
Julian turned up the stove a little more, to heat the room better.
47
George cuddled Timmy and was soon as warm as toast, but the others lay awake, trying to get theircold hands and feet warm again. Julian felt very puzzled. So there was a lot of truth in that woman'speculiar tale, after all!
They awoke late the next morning, for they had been tired out with their exertions the day before, andwith the excitements in the night. Julian leapt out of his bunk when he found that it was actually tento nine, and dressed quickly, calling to the others. He went out to get some snow to put into the kettle.
Soon breakfast was ready, for Anne was next to get up, and she began quickly to prepare some food.
Boiled eggs and ham, bread, butter and jam - and good hot cocoa again. Soon they were all eatingand chattering, talking over the happenings of the night, which somehow didn't seem nearly soremarkable now that daylight was everywhere, brilliant with the snow, and the sun trying to come outfrom behind the clouds.
As they sat round the table, eating and talking, Timmy ran to the door and began to bark. 'Now what'sup?' said Dick. Then a face looked in at the window!
It was a remarkable face, old, lined and wrinkled, yet curiously young-looking too. The eyes were asblue as a summer sky. It was a man's face, with a long, raggedy beard and a moustache.
'Gracious - he looks like one of the old prophets out of the Bible,' said Anne, really startled.
'Who is he?'
'The shepherd, I expect,' said Julian, going to the door. 'We'll ask him in for a cup of cocoa.
Maybe he can answer a few questions for us!'
He opened the door. 'Are you the shepherd?' he said. 'Come in. We're having breakfast and we cangive you some too, if you like.'
The shepherd came in, and smiled, making many more wrinkles appear on his weather-beaten face.
Julian wondered if he spoke English, or only Welsh. He was a fine-looking fellow, tall and straight,and obviously much younger than he looked.
'You are kind, young sir,' he said, standing there with his crook, and Anne suddenly felt that theremust have been men just like this all through the history of the world, ever since there had been sheepon the hills, and men to watch them.
The shepherd spoke slowly, for English words were not easy to him. 'You want to send - to send- words - to the farm?' he said, in the lilting Welsh voice, so pleasant to hear.
48
'Oh yes - please take a message to the farm,' said Julian, handing him some bread and butter, and adish of cheese. 'Just say we're fine, and all is well.'
'All is well, all is well,' repeated the shepherd, and refused the bread and cheese. 'No. I do not eatnow. But the drink, yes, I will have, and thanking you I am, for the morning is cold.'
'Shepherd,' said Julian, 'did you hear queer noises last night - rumblings and grumblings - and did youfeel shudderings and see a coloured mist over the hill yonder?'
The shepherd listened intently, trying to follow the strange English words. He understood that Julianwas asking him something about the opposite hill.
He took a sip of his cocoa, and looked over to the hill. 'Always it has been a strange hill,' he saidslowly, pronouncing some of his words queerly, so that they were hard to understand. 'My grandadtold me a big dog lay below, growling for food, and my granny said witches lived there and madetheir spells, and - and the smock rose up...'
'Smock? What does he mean by that?' said George.
'He means 'smoke' I should think,' said Julian. 'Don't interrupt. Let him talk. This is very interesting.'
'The smock rose up, and we saw it in the sky,' went on the shepherd, his forehead wrinkled with theeffort of using words he was not familiar with. 'And it comes still, young ones, it comes still!
The big dog, he growls, the witches they cook in their pots, and the smock, it rises.'
'We heard the big dog growling last night, and saw the witches' smoke,' said Anne, quite under thespell of the lilting voice of the old shepherd.
The man looked at her and smiled. 'Yes,' he said. 'Yes. But the dog is worse now and the witches aremore bad - more wickit, much more wickit...'
'More wicked?' said Julian. 'How?'
The shepherd shook his head. 'I am not clever,' he said. 'I know few things - my sheep, and the windand the sky - and I know too that the hill is wickit - yes, more wickit. Near it you must not go, youngones! For there the plough will not plough the fields, the spade will not dig, and neither will the fork.'
This somehow sounded so much like a piece out of the Old Testament that the children felt quitesolemn. What a strange and impressive old man - and yet he was only a shepherd.
49
'Still,' thought Julian, gazing at him, 'he has absolutely nothing to do but think long long thoughts allthe hours he sits watching his sheep. No wonder he says extraordinary things. But what does he meanabout the plough not ploughing the fields, I wonder?'
The shepherd put his cup down on the table. 'I go now,' he said. 'And I take your words to Mrs.
Jones. And I thank you for your kindness. Good day!'
He went out with great dignity, and the children saw him striding past the window, his beard beingblown backwards by the wind.
'Well!' said Dick, 'what a character! I almost felt that I was in church, listening to a preacher. I likedhim, didn't you? But what did he mean about ploughs not ploughing and spades not digging? That'snonsense!'
'Well - it may not be,' said Julian. 'After all, we know that our car wouldn't go down that hill fast- and you remember that Aily's mother - the shepherd's wife - said that the postman had to leave hisbicycle at the bottom of the hill - even that wouldn't work! So it's quite likely that in the old daysploughs went too heavily and too slowly to plough properly, and that spades were the same.'
'But why?' said Anne, puzzled. 'Surely you don't really believe these things? I know our car wentcrawling down - but that might have been because something went wrong in its works for a littlewhile!'
'Anne doesn't want to believe in ploughs and spades and forks that won't do their jobs!' said Dick,teasingly. 'Come on - let's forget the queer happenings last night and put on our skis. I feel pretty stiffafter yesterday - but a bit of skiing down those slopes will do me good. What about it?'
'Yes! Come on!' said Julian. 'Buck up with the clearing away, Anne - Dick and I will get out the skis.
Hurry!'
11.怪事连篇
怪事连篇
安妮一惊叫，把所有人都弄醒了。朱利安忘了自己睡在上铺，还以为自己睡在家，一跃而起，结果一个踉跄跌到地上，颤颤巍巍，惊魂未定。
“天哪！朱利安，你忘了你睡在上铺啊！”乔治半担心半取笑地说，“安妮你没事吧？怎么回事？为什么尖叫？是看见什么东西了吗？”
“没！但是我听见了一些奇怪的声音，还感觉到了什么东西！”安妮说，幸好大家都醒过来了，“蒂米也感觉到了，但是现在这种感觉已经消失了。”
“如果是真的，那它究竟是什么呢？”朱利安问道，随后坐到了迪克的床边，轻轻揉着自己的膝盖，应该是刚才摔倒时撞到地板上受了伤。
“是一种非常非常低沉的隆隆声，”安妮说，“从非常非常远的地方传过来的隆隆声。不像天上的雷声，倒更像是从地底下传来的！
然后，到处都开始颤动！我感觉到我的床沿在抖。我也不知道怎么解释，真的好可怕！”
“听起来像是一场小的地震，”迪克一边说，一边在想安妮是不是做了个噩梦，然后信以为真了，“不管怎么说，你现在还能听到或感觉到吗？你确定不是做噩梦？”
“我确定！我……”正在安妮说话间，状况又开始了！首先是奇怪低沉的轰隆声，跟安妮描述的完全一样。随后是同样奇怪的颤动。这种感觉带动了孩子们的身体，弄得孩子们也跟着一块微微颤抖，而且还久久不停。
“好像我身体的每一个地方都在颤抖，”迪克惊奇地说，“好像我体内有个低频发动机在运作。”
“对！你的描述简直太对了！”乔治说，“天啊，我摸了摸蒂米，我发现它也在颤抖！就好像我把手放到了工作中的冰箱上。”
“又消失了！”乔治刚讲完，迪克便抢着说，“我没有抖了，它突然消失了！也听不到轰隆声了，全都停止了！你们呢？”
大家一致认为噪音和颤抖都停止了。那么问题是，那究竟是什么呢？
“肯定和我今晚在对面古塔那边看到的‘闪光的东西’有关，”迪克回忆道，“我得去窗边再看看对面的山丘，看看它是不是又出现了。”
说罢，他从床上跳了起来，跑到了窗户边。他立刻惊叫起来：“快来看！哇！快来看！”
所有人，也包括蒂米在内，立刻冲到了窗户边，蒂米用后腿支撑着立了起来，前爪扒在窗户上往外看。这次，他们终于看到了一些奇怪的东西！
对面山上围绕着一层薄雾，神神秘秘、闪闪发光，在乌黑的夜里格外显眼！它显得非常厚重，而不像往日的那种轻柔。
“快看！”安妮惊奇地说，“好奇怪的颜色啊，不是红色，不是黄色，也不是橙色，究竟是什么颜色啊？”
“这与我之前看到的不一样，”朱利安严肃地说，“我觉得太奇怪了！这里究竟发生了什么？难怪艾丽的妈妈会讲述那些故事，看来她并不是道听途说！我们最好明天再好好咨询一下。”
“有趣的是，我看到的那个闪闪发光的东西和这片云雾都出现在古塔那座山上，”迪克说，“你们不觉得这些都和古塔有关吗？”
“当然不觉得！”朱利安说，“你说那里发生什么，能让在这里的我们有刚才那些奇怪的感觉呢？比如说奇怪的颤抖？这个世界上，除了雷声，我们怎么可能听到一英里外传来的轰隆声？很明显这不是古塔传来的。”
“雾散了，”安妮说，“大家快看，它变颜色了！不对，它越来越淡了。它消失了！”
他们站着又看了好一会儿，朱利安感觉到站在他身边的安妮抖得厉害。
“你被冻坏了！”他说，“走吧，我们回被窝睡觉。大家都不想再患上重感冒了吧。依我看，这一切都非常奇怪，我也希望能有一个合理的解释，或许这周围地下有矿产，采矿作业白天晚上都进行也说不定。”
“我们一定要弄清楚。”迪克说。所有的人都冻坏了，大家赶紧爬回了自己的被窝。朱利安把小油炉开得更大了些，让房间更暖和点。
乔治把蒂米搂在怀里，相互依偎着取暖。其他人都还醒着，试着暖手暖脚。朱利安感到十分困惑，毕竟那个妇人讲的故事大多都应验了！
第二天早上他们起得很晚，前一天大家确实累坏了，而且又折腾到大半夜。眼看八点五十分了，朱利安赶紧从床上跳了起来，快速洗漱完毕，叫醒了其他人，然后去户外取了一些雪回来。
早餐很快便准备好了。安妮是第二个起床的，所以她飞快地准备了些食物：熟鸡蛋、火腿、面包、黄油、果酱，当然还有热可可。很快，大家都坐了下来，一边吃一边喋喋不休地讨论昨晚发生的事情。但不知什么缘故，那些都显得不怎么起眼了。此刻阳光倾泻，在雪地上反射出柔和的光，太阳也试着从云层后面现身。
正当他们在餐桌上一边吃一边聊的时候，蒂米跑到门口叫了起来。迪克问：“怎么了？”随后，窗户外突然出现一张脸，正透着玻璃往里看！
这是一张引人注意的脸，苍老暗淡，满是皱纹，但奇怪的是，看起来也有几分年轻，双眼就像夏日的天空一样蓝。这是一个男人，长了一脸的胡茬和胡须，随性自在。
“天啊！他看起来就像《圣经》里的一个先知，”安妮说，着实吓了一跳，“他是谁？”
“我猜是牧羊人，”朱利安边说边往门口走去，“我们叫他进来喝杯可可吧，或许他能回答我们几个疑问！”
说着他打开了门，“您是牧羊人吗？快请进，我们正在吃早餐，如果您不介意的话，和我们一起吃吧！”
牧羊人走了进来，朝孩子们微笑，那饱经风霜的脸上绽开了更多的皱纹。朱利安想知道他会说英语还是只会威尔士语。这位男士长得一表人才，高高大大，比看上去要年轻壮实很多。
“你真善良，小朋友。”他说，手里拿着牧羊棍。安妮突然明白了，从古到今，世界上都得有这样的人，因为只要山上有山羊，就得找人去看护它们。
牧羊人说得很慢，因为对他来说英语单词并不简单。“你们是想带个口信给农场吗？”他问道，带着轻微的威尔士口音，听起来却舒服极了。
“嗯，是的。劳烦您帮我们捎个口信回去，”朱利安一边说，一边递上了面包和黄油，还有一盘奶酪，“您就告诉他们我们在山上一切都好，过得很开心。”
“一切都好，一切都好，”牧羊人嘴里默念着，并回绝了递上来的面包和奶酪，“不用了，我现在不吃东西。但是喝的，是的，我有点渴了，谢谢你们，早晨实在太冷了。”
“牧羊人大叔，”朱利安说，“您昨晚听到什么奇怪的声音了吗？
轰隆隆的。您感觉到震动了吗？还有对面山上升起一团彩色的雾，您看见了吗？”
牧羊人专心听着，试着理解所有的英语单词。他明白朱利安是在询问对面山上的一些事情。
他喝了一口可可，然后看向对面的山。“那座山很奇怪，”他慢慢地说，有的单词发音很怪，所以很难听懂，“我爷爷告诉我，山里有一只大狗，整日咆哮着寻东西吃，我奶奶说女巫住在山里，整日做法，然后，就会升起‘厌恶’……”
“厌恶？他说的是什么意思？”乔治问。
“我觉得他的意思应该是‘烟雾’，”朱利安说，“你别打断，让他讲，越来越有趣了！”
“‘厌恶’上升后，我们抬头看见了，”牧羊人继续说，拧着眉头说着他不熟悉的词汇，“但是孩子们，它还是来了，它终究还是来了！
那只大狗，咆哮着。巫婆用大锅煮，然后‘厌恶’便升起了。”
“昨晚我们听见了大狗的低吼，看见了巫婆的烟雾。”安妮说着，完全沉浸在牧羊人用奇怪口音讲述的故事中。
男人看着她，微笑着说：“是的，不错这只狗更凶残了，巫婆也更坏了，更‘凶饿’，更‘残饱’……”
“更凶恶，更残暴？”朱利安说，“怎么？”
牧羊人摇摇头。“我不聪明，”他说，“我只了解一点点，我的羊，风，天空，我还知道这座山也很‘凶饿’，是的，如今是远胜于‘凶饿’。小朋友们，你们千万不要靠近它！在那里，犁不能耕田，锹不能挖地，连叉子也不能用。”
这听起来像极了《圣经》里的一个部分，孩子们肃然起敬。这个男人很奇怪，又让人印象深刻，而他只不过是个牧羊人。
“看来也不过如此，”朱利安凝视着他，心中暗想，“他整日坐着看管山羊，无所事事便会这样胡思乱想吧，难怪他说了这么多不同寻常的话。但是他说犁不耕地是什么意思呢？”
牧羊人放下杯子说：“我准备走了，我会把话带给琼斯太太的，谢谢你们的招待！祝你们玩得开心！”
他挺直胸膛走了出去，孩子们看他昂首阔步从窗边走过，胡子被风吹得飘了起来。
“好吧！”迪克说，“这人真奇怪！我差点产生错觉以为自己在教堂里，听牧师宣讲呢！不过我挺喜欢他的，你们呢？他说‘犁不耕田，锹不挖地’是什么意思啊？这不是胡说嘛！”
“不，也有可能不是，”朱利安说，“毕竟我们也知道汽车不能快速下山，而且你们还记得吗？艾丽的妈妈，也就是那位牧羊人的妻子，曾经说过邮递员会把自行车放在山脚自己爬上山，尽管这听起来十分不可思议！所以，很有可能犁耙太重，用来耕地太费劲，也耕不好。对于铁锹来说，也是一样的原因。”
“但原因是什么呢？”安妮困惑不解，“但你真的相信这些东西吗？我知道我们的车下山极其缓慢，但可能是因为车本身在那一小段时间里出了些问题！”
“安妮不愿相信犁耙、铁锹、叉子罢工的事实！”迪克开玩笑说，“好了！别在意昨晚发生的怪事了，我们带上滑雪板出去滑雪吧！我都快冻僵了，滑雪会让我暖和点，你们来吗？”
“好的！走吧！”朱利安说，“安妮、乔治快收拾下餐桌。我和迪克去拿滑雪板。”
Chapter 12 OUT ON THE HILLS
Chapter 12 OUT ON THE HILLS
Timmy didn't find skiing any fun at all, because, not being fitted with skis, he couldn't keep up withthe others, when they tore down the hill at top speed!
50
At first he plunged after them, but when he jumped into a great soft heap of snow, and buried himselfcompletely, he decided that this kind of winter sport was not for him! He clambered out of the snow-heap, shook the snow off his coat, and stared forlornly after the shouting children.
They had skied before, and were quite good at it. The hill down which they went was very long, andhad a fine slope. It ran smoothly into the upward slope of the next hill, on which Old Towers househad been built.
Julian did a marvellous run down, and went swinging on up the opposite hill. He called to the others.
'I say - what about going up to the top of this hill, because we're already part of the way up - and ski-ing down, and partly up our own slope again. It would save time, and give us a jolly good second ski-run.'
All but Anne thought this was a very good idea. She said nothing, and Dick looked at her.
'She's scared of going up Old Towers Hill!' he said. 'Are you afraid of the big, big dog, Anne, wholies under it and growls at night, or of the lank-haired witches that sit on the hill and make theirsmoky spells?'
'Don't be silly,' said Anne, cross with Dick for reading her thoughts. She didn't believe in either dogor witches, but somehow she did not like that hill! 'I'm coming too, of course!'
So she toiled up the opposite hill with the others, quite ready to enjoy the lovely run down, and to endhalf-way up their own hill.
'Look - you can see Old Towers quite clearly now,' said George to Julian. She was right. There, notfar off, was the great old house, set with towers, built cosily into the side of the steep hill.
They stood still and looked at it. 'We can even see down into a few of the rooms,' said Julian. 'Iwonder if the old lady is still there - Mrs. Thomas - the one that Aily's mother used to go and workfor?'
'Poor old thing - I'm sorry for her if she is,' said George. 'Seeing nobody - keeping out all her friends!
I wish we could go and enquire at the house for something - pretend we've lost our way, and snoopround a bit. But there's that fierce dog.'
'Yes - we don't want any more fights,' said Julian. 'Now - we're almost at the top. We'll wait for theothers and then have a race. What a wonderful slope!'
51
'Julian - look - is that someone at one of the tower windows - the one to the right?' said Georgesuddenly, as they stood waiting, looking down at the big old house some way off below them.
Julian looked at the tower at once, just in time to see someone disappear.
'Yes. It was someone!' he said. 'Someone staring at us, I think. I expect no one ever comes near thishill, and it must have been a surprise to look out and see us! Did you make out if it was a man or awoman?'
'A woman, I think,' said George. 'Could it have been old Mrs. Thomas, do you think? Oh, Ju -you don't suppose she's being kept prisoner in that tower, do you - while her horrid son and hisfriends gradually steal everything? You know we heard that vans went up to the house in the middleof the night.'
'Hallo, you two!' said Dick, labouring up with Anne. 'What a climb! Still, the run down will be worthit. I simply must have a rest first, though!'
'Dick, George and I thought we saw someone at the tower window there - the one on the right,'
said Julian. 'When we get back we'll get our field-glasses and train them on to that window. We mightpossibly see some sign of anyone there!'
Dick and Anne stared hard at the tower window - and as they looked, someone drew the curtainsswiftly across!
'There - we've been seen - and we're not going to be encouraged to look at the old place!' said Julian.
'No wonder there are queer stories about it! Come on, now - let's start our run down!'
They set off together, each taking a different line. Whooooooosh! The wind blew in their faces asthey flew down the white slope, gasping in delight at their speed. Julian and Anne slid swiftly all theway down the first slope and half-way up the next - but Dick and George were not so fortunate. Theyboth caught their skis in something, and shot into the air and then down into the soft snow. They laythere breathless, almost dazed with the sudden stoppage.
'Whew!' said Dick, at last. 'What a shock! Is that you, George? Are you all right?'
'I think so,' said George. 'One ankle feels a bit queer - no, I think it's all right! Hallo, here's Tim!
He must have seen us fall, and come rushing down to help. It's all right, Tim. We're not hurt. It's allpart of the fun!'
As they lay there, getting their breath, half-way down the first slope, a loud voice shouted in thedistance.
'Hey there! You keep off this slope!'
52
Dick sat up straight at once. He saw a tall fellow wading through the snow towards them, from thedirection of Old Towers, looking angry.
'We're only skiing!' shouted back Dick. 'And we're not doing any harm! Who are you?'
'I'm the caretaker,' shouted the man, nodding his head towards Old Towers. 'This field belongs to thehouse. So keep off it!'
'We'll come and ask permission of the owners,' yelled Dick, standing up, thinking this might be agood way of having a look at the house.
'You can't. There's no one else here but me!' shouted back the man. 'I'm the caretaker, I tell you.
I'll set my dog on you all, if you don't do what I say!'
'That's funny,' said Dick to George, as the man waded back through the snow. 'He says he's the onlyone in the house - and yet we saw someone in the right-hand tower only a few minutes ago!
The caretaker wouldn't have had time to have got here from the tower - so he isn't the only one in thehouse. There is someone in the tower as well. Queer, isn't it?'
George had held Timmy by the collar all the time the man was speaking. Timmy had growled at theman's angry voice, and George was afraid he might fly at him. Then, if the other dog appeared, theremight be a fight! That would be dreadful! Timmy might get bitten again.
She and Dick tried their skis to see if they were still properly fixed, after their fall - and then wentsmoothly gliding off again. The others were waiting at the top of the hill for them.
'Who was that man? What was he shouting about?' demanded Julian. 'Did he actually come from OldTowers?'
'Yes - and a surly fellow he was, too,' said Dick. 'He ordered us to keep off that slope - said itbelonged to Old Towers and he was the caretaker - and when we said we'd go and ask permissionfrom the owners, he said he was the only one in the house! But we know different.'
'Yes. We do,' said Julian, puzzled. 'Why should it matter to anyone if we ski down that particularslope? Are they afraid we might see something in the house - as we did! And why tell a lie and saythere was no one else there? Did he sound like a caretaker?'
'Well - he didn't sound Welsh!' said George. 'And I should have thought that any owners would havechosen someone trustworthy from the village, someone Welsh, wouldn't you? This is all rathermysterious!'
'And if you add to it all the strange noises and things, it's extremely curious,' said Dick. 'In fact, I feelit might be worth enquiring into!'
53
'No,' said Anne. 'Don't let's spoil our holiday. It's such a short one.'
'Well - I don't see how we can enquire into the matter,' said George. 'I'm certainly not going to thathouse while the dog is there - and there's no other way of making enquiries - even if they would getus anywhere, which I'm pretty sure they wouldn't!'
'I say - do you know that it's almost one o'clock?' said Anne, pleased to change the subject. 'Isn'tanybody hungry?'
'Yes - I'm ravenous!' said Julian. 'But as I thought it was only about half-past eleven, I didn't like tomention it! Let's go in and have dinner. I vote we finish up that ham!'
They went to the hut, and there, standing in the snow outside it, were two quart bottles of milk, and alarge parcel which Timmy at once went to, wagging his tail eagerly. He gave a little bark.
'He says it's meat, so it must be for him,' said George with a laugh.
Julian tore off the paper and laughed too. 'Well, Timmy's right,' he said. 'It's a big piece of cold roastpork. No ham for me, then. I'll have some of this!'
'Pity we haven't any apple sauce,' said Dick. 'I love it with pork.'
'Well, if you like to wait while I make some on the stove, with a few of the apples we brought...'
began Anne. But the others refused at once. No one was going to wait one minute longer for theirmeal than they could help, apple sauce or not!
It was a merry meal, and certainly the pork was good. Timmy had a piece and thought that Georgewas very mean not to give him the rest of the joint when they had finished with it.
'Oh no, Tim!' said George, as he put an enquiring paw on her knee. 'Certainly not. We're going tofinish it up tomorrow! You shall have the bone then.'
'There's more snow coming,' said Julian, looking out of the window. 'I say - who brought the meatand the milk here, do you think?'
'The shepherd, I should imagine, on his way back,' said Dick. 'Jolly nice of him. I wonder where thatkid Aily is? I'd be scared of her getting caught in the snow, and having to sleep on the hills in it.'
'I expect she'll look after herself all right and her lamb and dog!' said Julian. 'I'd like to see her again -but unless she's hungry, I don't expect we shall!'
'Talk of an angel and hear the rustle of her wings!' said Anne. 'Here she is!' And sure enough, therewas Aily, looking in at the window, holding up her lamb for him to take a peep too!
54
'Let's get her in and feed her - and ask her if she knows who lives in Old Towers,' said George.
'She might have seen someone in that right-hand tower too, as we did!'
'Right. I'll call her in,' said Julian, going to the door. 'She might know something - always scouringround about the countryside!'
He was right! Aily did know something - something that interested everyone very much!
12.雪地古塔
雪地古塔
蒂米发觉滑雪一点也不好玩，倒不是因为它没有滑雪板，而是因为孩子们用滑雪板下山时，它根本追不上。
一开始蒂米还奋力追赶，但当它一头扎进雪堆里，完全被雪覆盖时，它才意识到这项户外活动不适合它！它从雪堆里艰难地爬出来，使劲摇了摇，抖掉身上的雪，只能可怜巴巴地盯着欢呼大叫的孩子们。
他们之前滑过雪，而且技术很好。这个斜坡很长，而且坡度刚好。一个山坡连着另一个山坡，古塔就耸立在对面的山坡上。
朱利安这次滑得特别漂亮，直接冲到对面的山坡上去了。他对其他人喊道：“我们去这座山顶瞧瞧吧，反正我们都已经滑到半坡了，待会儿滑下去，我们就又能回到山坡了。这样既省时间，又能多玩一把！”
大家都认为这个主意很棒，但安妮一言不发，迪克发现了这一点。
“你肯定是害怕去古塔！”迪克说，“你是不是害怕那只大狗，看守古塔并在夜里怒吼的那只，还是说你害怕那个头发稀疏的女巫，坐在山巅，施展着烟雾般的法术？”
“别傻了！”安妮说，迪克猜中了她的想法，让她又尴尬又生气。她既不相信狗也不相信女巫的传说，但不知为何她就是对那座山没有好感！“等着，我来了！”
于是，她和其他小伙伴一起滑上了对面的山坡，随时准备从山上滑下，完成这半边山坡的滑行之旅。
“你看！这下可以清清楚楚地看到古塔了吧。”乔治对朱利安说。她说得确实不错，就在不远处，屹立着一幢古老的建筑，外观都是塔楼，恰到好处建在了悬崖峭壁上。
大家停下来，仔细观察。“我们甚至能看到几个房间，”朱利安说，“我很好奇那位托马斯老太太还在不在这里，就是艾丽妈妈以前服侍过的那位。”
“如果她还在，就真的太可怜了，”乔治说，“谁也见不着，和所有的老朋友隔绝！我觉得我们可以到房子跟前去问一些问题，假装我们迷了路，找了很久都没找到出口。但唯独里面有只恶狗！”
“对啊！我可不想再来一架了，”朱利安说，“现在，我们先等等他们两个，然后来场比赛怎么样。这个斜坡真的太棒了！”
“朱利安，快看！那座塔上右边的窗户那里是站了个人吗？”乔治突然说道，这时，他们用余光俯视着山坡下不远处的那座大房子。朱利安立刻转头看，那个人眨眼间就消失了。
“是的！真的有人！”他说，“有人在盯着我们。我想毕竟这个地方很久都没有人来了，所以一下子看到我们几个应该还是很惊讶的！你看清是位女士还是男士了吗？”
“应该是位女士，”乔治说，“你觉得有可能是托马斯老太太吗？
对啊，朱利安，你不觉得她像个犯人一样被囚禁在那座塔楼里吗？
她那可怕的儿子和朋友们逐渐偷走了她的一切。你记得吗，他们不是还说，到了半夜会有运货的小卡车停在房子外面吗。”
“厉害啊，你们两个！”迪克大叫着，他和安妮喘着大气，总算赶上来了，“爬上来真够累的！不过，滑下去肯定值！但我还是得先休息一下。”
“迪克，我和乔治好像看见古塔右边窗户边站了个人，”朱利安说，“待会儿我们回去，把望远镜拿来，然后对准那扇窗户。或许能发现人的踪迹！”
迪克和安妮死死盯着那扇窗户，正当他们看得专注，窗帘突然被人合上了！
“就在那里！看来我们被发现了！大家都别再盯着古塔看了！”朱利安说，“难怪有那么多关于它的传说呢！走吧，我们滑下去吧！”
他们同时出发，每个人都选了不同的路线！哇！滑下雪白的斜坡，风呼呼地打在脸上，他们大口喘气，神采奕奕。朱利安和安妮轻快地下滑，一路畅通，已经开始往上爬坡了，但是迪克和乔治就没有那么幸运了。他们都在路上被什么东西绊住了，整个人都飞到空中，然后一头栽进了雪堆里，气喘吁吁，被这突然的摔跤弄得一阵眩晕。
“哎！”迪克开口了，“吓死人了！乔治是你吗？你还好吗？”
“我没事，”乔治说，“但我有个脚踝有点不舒服。咦不对，我都好着呢！哈哈，是蒂米！肯定是它看见我们摔跤，跑过来帮忙来了。蒂米，我没事。我们没有受伤，我们摔得很开心呢！”
他们躺在半山坡上，正喘着气，突然从远方传来一阵响亮的喊叫声：“喂，你们离这个斜坡远点！”
迪克马上坐了起来。他看见一个高大壮实的男人正穿过雪地朝他们走来，从古塔的方向而来，面露凶相。
“我们只是在滑雪！”迪克回复说，“我们没想搞破坏！请问你是谁？”
“我是大管家，”男人一边大喊，一边转头回去看了看古塔，“这块山坡属于那个房子，所以，你们最好走远点。”
“我们会去征求主人的同意。”迪克站了起来，大喊道，心想这可能是一个很好的借口去仔细瞧瞧那栋房子。
“不行。这里除了我没有其他人在了！”这个男人大声吼道，“我是大管家！我警告你们，如果你们不按我说的做，我就放狗咬你们！”
“太搞笑了，”见那个男的转身返回，迪克对乔治说，“他说这个房子里就他一个，但我们几分钟前还在右边窗户上看见了一个人影！而且短短几分钟，就从楼上走到山坡是不可能的，所以房子里绝对不止他一个，肯定还有其他人！这也太奇怪了吧？”
在那个男人说话的时候，乔治一直紧紧抓着蒂米的项圈。蒂米已经朝着那个男人咆哮好多次了，乔治担心它向那个人扑过去。而且，如果恶狗被放出来，肯定又是一场恶战！简直让人不敢想象，蒂米很可能又会受伤！
乔治和迪克试着站上滑雪板，看看能不能继续滑行。所幸并无大碍，他们顺利地开启了第二次滑行。另外两个小伙伴早就在对面的山上等着他们了。
“那个男人是谁？他刚刚大吼大叫什么呢？”朱利安急切地问，“他是从古塔里面出来的吗？”
“是的，也是个性情乖戾的家伙，”迪克说，“他命令我们远离那个斜坡，并说那个斜坡属于古塔，他是古塔的大管家，我们必须得到古塔主人的同意才能去斜坡上玩。他说房子里只有他一个人，但我们刚才明明还看见了有其他人！”
“行！那我们就这样做，”朱利安说，一脸困惑，“但是如果我们从那块斜坡上滑下来，会妨碍到他们吗？他们是不是心虚害怕我们看见什么不该看的东西呢！而且为什么要撒谎说里面再没有其他人了呢？他说话的语气听起来像是管家吗？”
“他说话不带威尔士口音，”乔治说，“我认为，按常理来说，房子主人都会雇佣一名信得过的当地威尔士人，你觉得呢？这一切都太诡异了！”
“如果再把昨晚奇怪的噪音和一切都联系起来，就更加奇怪了，”迪克说，“事实上，这更加让我想要一探究竟！”
“不行，”安妮说，“别让我们的假期就这么泡汤了呀。这也太短了！”
“好吧，我也就说说而已，我也不知道要怎么调查，”乔治说，“如果那只狗看大门的时候，我是断然不会冒冒失失去那所房子的。就算他们允许进入，我们也没有其他方法去查证。而且我敢肯定，他们绝不会让我们进入的！”
“我说，你们知道现在下午一点了吗？”安妮说，恳求着要换个话题，“大家都不饿吗？”
“我超级饿！”朱利安说，“但我以为才十一点半，所以一直没吭声。我们回小屋吃午餐吧！我敢打赌我们会消灭那根火腿！”
他们返回了小屋，小屋门口放着两瓶两夸脱容量的牛奶，还有一个大的包裹。蒂米立刻跑了过去，急切地摇着尾巴。它轻轻叫了一声。
“它说里面是肉，那是它的。”乔治笑着说。
朱利安撕掉包装纸，也笑了：“嗯，蒂米说对了。这确实是一块冷冻的烤猪肉。我不吃火腿了，我要吃这个！”
“可惜我们没有苹果酱了，”迪克说，“我最喜欢烤猪肉就着苹果酱一起吃了。”
“如果你能稍等一会儿，我就用炉子给你做一些，我们不是带了几个苹果……”安妮作势要开始做果酱。但其他小伙伴一口回绝了，大家都迫不及待想吃饭了，苹果酱，可有可无。
午餐吃得很开心，烤猪肉非常美味可口。蒂米也吃了一块，但它耿耿于怀于乔治吝啬得没把大家吃剩下的给它。
“别这样，蒂米！”蒂米把前爪放到了乔治的膝盖上，“不能吃了，这是留给明天吃的！你可以吃骨头了。”
“又下雪了，”朱利安看向窗外，“我想知道是谁把肉和牛奶送过来的。”
“我猜是牧羊人，肯定是他返回的时候顺路给我们捎来了，”迪克说，“他人真好。我想知道那个女孩艾丽在哪里？我很担心她在大雪里患上感冒，而且还在山里过夜。”
“希望它能照顾好自己和她的小羊、小狗！”朱利安说，“我多想再见她一面啊！但除非她饿了，才有可能！我是不指望我们会再见到她了！”
“真是说曹操，曹操到！”安妮说，“她在那儿呢！”正在这时，艾丽出现了，她正抱着自己的小羊，站在窗户边，偷偷地往房子里看呢！
“我们把她叫进来，给她点吃的吧，顺便可以打听一下谁住在古塔里，”乔治说，“或许她跟我们一样，见过古塔右边窗户出现的那个人呢！”
“好的，我去叫她进来，”朱利安一边往门口走去，一边说，“她老是在村子周围晃荡，说不定真的知道什么秘密呢！”
朱利安说得很对！艾丽的确知道不少秘密，人人都感兴趣的秘密！
Chapter 13 AILY IS SURPRISING
Chapter 13 AILY IS SURPRISING
Aily was not shy this time. She did not run away when Julian opened the door. She was still dressedin the same few clothes, but her face glowed, and she certainly didn't look cold!
'Hallo, Aily!' said Julian. 'Come along in. We're having dinner - and there is plenty for you!'
The dog ran right up to the door and into the room, when he smelt the dinner there. Timmy lookedmost surprised, and gave a very small growl.
'No, Tim, no - he's your guest,' said George. 'Remember your manners, please!'
The small dog wagged his tail vigorously. 'There, Timmy! He's telling you not to be afraid of him; hewon't hurt you!' said Anne, which made everyone laugh. Timmy wagged his tail vigorously, too, andthe pair were friends at once.
Aily came in then, the lamb in her arms, in case Timmy might object to him. But Timmy didn't.
He was very interested in the little creature, and when Aily set him down and let him run about theroom, Timmy ran sniffing after him, his tail still wagging fast.
Anne offered the untidy little girl some of the meat but she shook her head and pointed at the cheese.
'Aily like,' she said, and looked on in delight as Anne cut her a generous piece. She sat down on thefloor to eat it, and the lamb came along and nibbled at it too. It really was a dear little thing.
'Fany bach!' said the child, and kissed his little nose.
' 'Bach' is Welsh for 'dear', isn't it?' said Anne. She touched Aily on the arm. 'Aily bach!' she said, andthe child smiled a sudden sweet smile at her.
'Where did you sleep last night, Aily?' asked George. 'Your mother was looking for you.'
But she had spoken too quickly, and Aily didn't understand. George repeated her words slowly.
55
Aily nodded. 'In the hay,' she said. 'Down at Magga Farm.'
'Aily, listen - who lives at Old Towers?' asked Julian, speaking as slowly and clearly as he could.
'Many peoples,' said Aily, pointing to the cheese, to show that she wanted another piece. 'Big mans,little mans. Big dog, too. More big than him!' and she pointed at Timmy.
The others looked at one another in surprise. Many men! Whatever were they doing at Old Towers?
'And yet that caretaker fellow said he was the only one there!' said George.
'Aily, listen - is there - an - old - lady - there?' asked Julian, slowly. 'An - old - lady?'
Aily nodded her head. 'Yes - one old lady I see her high up in tower - sometime she not see Aily.
Aily hide.'
'Where do you hide?' asked Dick, curiously.
'Aily not tell, never not tell,' said the child, looking through half-closed eyes at Dick, as if she kepther secrets behind them.
'Did you see the old lady when you were in the fields?' asked Julian. Aily considered this, and shookher head.
'Well, where then?' asked Julian. 'Look - you shall have some of this chocolate if you can tell me.' Heheld the bar of chocolate just out of her reach. She looked at it with bright eyes.
Obviously chocolate was a rare treat for her. She reached out suddenly for it, but Julian was too quickfor her.
'No. You tell me what I ask you,' he said. 'Then you shall have the chocolate.'
Aily suddenly hit out with her hands and gave him a good punch in the chest. He laughed and tookboth her small hands in his big one.
'No, Aily, no. I am your friend. You do not hit a friend.'
'I know where you were, when you saw the old lady!' said Dick, slyly. 'Aily - you were in thegrounds - in the garden!'
'How you know?' cried Aily. She dragged her hands out of Julian's hand, and leapt to her feet, facingDick, looking furious and frightened.
'Here - don't get so upset,' said Dick, astonished.
'How you know?' demanded Aily again. 'You not tell no one?'
'Of course I've told no one,' said Dick, who had only just thought of the idea that very moment.
'Aha! So you get into the grounds of Old Towers, do you? How do you get in?'
56
'Aily not tell,' said the little girl, and suddenly burst into tears. Anne put her arm round her to comforther, but the child pushed it roughly away. 'He - Dave - went there, not me, not Aily.
Poor Dave - big dog bark, wuff-wuff, like that - and... and...'
'And so you went in to get Dave, didn't you?' said Dick. 'Good little Aily, brave Aily.'
The little girl rubbed her tears away with a grubby hand, and left black streaks down her cheeks.
She smiled at Dick, and nodded. 'Good Aily!' she repeated, and took the little dog on her knee andhugged him. 'Poor Dave bach!'
'So she got into the grounds, did she?' said Julian, in a low voice to Dick. 'I wonder how?
Through the hedge perhaps. Aily - we want to see this old lady. Can we get through the hedge roundthe garden?'
'No,' said Aily, shaking her head vigorously. 'Fence there - big high fence that bites.'
Everyone laughed at the idea of a biting fence. But George guessed what she meant. 'An electricfence!' she said. 'So that's what they've put round. My word - the place is like a fort! Locked gates, afierce dog, an electric fence!'
'How on earth did Aily get in, then?' said Dick. 'Aily - have you seen this old woman many times?
Has she seen you?'
Aily didn't understand and he had to ask his questions again, more simply. The child nodded herhead. 'Many times Aily see her - up high - and one time she see Aily. She throw out papers -little bits - out of the window.'
'Aily - did you pick them up?' said Julian, sitting up straight at once. 'Was there writing on them?'
Everyone waited for Aily's answers. She nodded her head. 'Yes. Writings like they do at school -pen writings.'
'Did you read any of them?' asked Dick.
Aily suddenly wore a hunted expression. She shook her head - then she nodded it. 'Yes, Aily readthem,' she said. 'They say 'Good morning, Aily. How are you, Aily?' '
'Does the old woman know you then?' asked Dick, surprised.
'No, she not know Aily - only Aily's Mam,' said the child. 'She say on her papers 'Aily, you good girl.
Aily, you very good!' '
'She's not telling the truth now,' said Dick, noticing that the child would not look at them when shespoke. 'I wonder why?'
57
'I think I know,' said Anne. She took a piece of paper and wrote on it clearly. 'Good morning, Aily.'
Then she showed it to the child. 'Read that, Aily,' she said.
But Aily couldn't! She had no idea what was written on the paper.
'She can't even read,' said Anne. 'And she was ashamed, so she pretended she could. Never mind,Aily! Listen - have you any of those bits of paper that the old woman dropped?'
Aily felt about in her few clothes, and at last produced a piece of paper that looked as if it had beentorn from the top of a page in a book. She gave it to Dick.
All the four bent over it, reading what was written there, in small, rather illegible writing.
'I want help. I am a prisoner here, in my own house, while terrible things go on. They have killed myson. Help me, help me! Bronwen Thomas.'
'Good gracious!' said Julian, very startled. 'I say - this is extraordinary, isn't it! Do you think we oughtto show it to the police?'
'Well - there is probably only one policeman shared between three or four of these little places,'
said Dick. 'And there's another thing - the old lady might be off her head, you know. What she saysmay not be true.'
'How can we possibly find out if it is or not?' said George.
Dick turned to Aily. 'Aily - we want to see the old lady - we want to take her something nice to eat -she is all by herself, she is sad. Will you show us the way into the grounds?'
'No,' said Aily, shaking her head vigorously. 'Big dog there - dog with teeth like this!' And she baredher own small white teeth and snarled, much to Timmy's astonishment. The children laughed.
'Well - we can't make her tell us,' said Julian. 'And anyway, even if we got into the grounds, that dogwould be there - and - I don't fancy him, somehow.'
'Aily show you way into house,' suddenly said the small girl, much to everyone's astonishment.
They all stared at her.
'Into the house!' said Dick. 'But - you'd have to show us the way into the grounds first if we are to getinto the house, Aily!'
'No,' said Aily, shaking her head. 'Aily show you way to house. Aily do that. No big dog there!'
Just then Timmy began to bark, and someone came by the door, looking in as she passed. It wasAily's mother, who had again been to take some things to her shepherd husband. She saw Aily sittingon the floor and gave an angry shout. Then standing at the door she poured out a long 58string of Welsh words which the children didn't understand. In a great fright Aily ran straight to acupboard, her dog and lamb with her.
But it was no good. Her mother stormed into the hut and dragged Aily out, shaking her well.
Timmy growled, but Aily's little dog was as frightened as she was, and the lamb bleated pitifully inthe child's arms.
'I take Aily home!' said her angry mother, glaring at the four children as if she thought they wereresponsible for the child's keeping away from home. 'I whip her well!'
And out she went, holding the protesting child firmly by one arm. The children could do nothing.
After all, she was Aily's mother, and the child really was a little monkey, the way she wanderedround the country.
'You know - I think we'd better go down to the farm and tell Morgan what we know,' said Julian,making up his mind. 'I really do. If this thing is serious - and if the old lady is really a prisoner - Idon't see how we can do a thing - but Morgan might be able to. He'd know the police for one thing.
Come on - let's go down now. We can stay at the farm for the night if it gets dark. Buck up- let's go straightaway!'
13.艾丽的秘密
艾丽的秘密
这一次，艾丽不再害羞。朱利安开门的时候，她并没有逃跑。
她仍然穿着同样单薄的衣服，但她脸上神采奕奕，看上去一点都不冷！
“你好，艾丽！”朱利安说，“快进来，我们正在吃午餐，准备了很多，你愿意加入我们吗？”
艾丽的小狗闻到了美味，一溜烟地从门口跑了进来。蒂米看见后很是惊讶，很小声地朝它吼了两声。
“别，蒂米！不要那样，那是你的客人，”乔治说，“注意言行！”
那只小狗使劲摇起了尾巴。“蒂米，你瞧！它在告诉你让你别害怕，它不会伤害你的！”安妮说完，逗得大家全都笑了。蒂米也开始疯狂摇尾巴，它俩一下子成了朋友。
艾丽走进来时连忙把小羊抱在怀里，以防蒂米会把矛头对准它。但是蒂米并无恶意，它对这个小家伙很感兴趣。艾丽见蒂米很友善，于是把小羊放了下来。小羊在屋子里转悠的时候，蒂米摇着尾巴，傻呵呵地跟在它后面。
安妮递给这个衣衫褴褛的小女孩一些肉，但是她摇了摇头，指着奶酪说：“艾丽喜欢。”于是安妮用刀切下一大块给她，艾丽高兴坏了。她坐在地板上吃起来，小羊顺势来到她身边，也开始一点点地啃。真是个惹人疼的小东西。
“范尼，小可耐！”女孩说了声方言，随即吻了吻羔羊的小鼻子。
“在威尔士语里，‘小可耐’是用来表达亲昵的称呼吗？”安妮一边说，一边拍了拍艾丽的手臂，“小可耐，艾丽！”女孩听了，朝安妮绽放出甜美的笑容。
“艾丽，你昨晚在哪里睡觉的呀？”乔治问，“你妈妈正四处找你。”
但是乔治说得很快，艾丽没有听懂。于是，乔治又放慢语速问了一遍。
艾丽点点头：“在干草堆里，玛嘉农场下面。”
“艾丽，谁，住在，古塔，里面？”朱利安问，尽可能慢地把话说清楚。
“很多人，”艾丽一边说，一边又指了指奶酪，表示她想再来一块，“大个子人，小个子人，还有大狗，比它还大！”她指了指蒂米。
孩子们十分惊讶，面面相觑！许多人！这些人在古塔里面做什么？
“但是，那个看门人说房子里只有他一个！”乔治说。
“艾丽，听着，那里面，有一位，老太太吗？”朱利安一字一句地问，“一位，老太太。”
艾丽点了点头：“是的，一个老太太，塔的高处。有时候她看不到艾丽，艾丽藏起来了。”
“你藏在哪里了？”迪克好奇地问。
“艾丽不说，绝不。”女孩说，她半睁着眼瞧了瞧迪克，就好像她要独吞这个秘密。
“你是在田野里看到那个老太太的吗？”朱利安问。艾丽想了想，又摇了摇头。
“好吧，那是哪里？”朱利安问，“如果你能告诉我，我就把这些巧克力给你。”他把巧克力举高，放到艾丽拿不到的高处。艾丽看见巧克力两眼放光，很显然巧克力对她来说是一种奢侈品。她突然伸出手来，但朱利安还是快她一步。
“不行，你得先告诉我，”他说，“这样我才能给你巧克力。”
艾丽伸起两只手，握成拳头，狠狠朝朱利安胸口推去。朱利安用大手一下子握住了艾丽伸过来的两只小手，得意地笑了。
“别，艾丽！不可以！我是你的朋友，朋友不能打朋友。”
“艾丽，我知道你是藏在哪里看见老太太的了！”迪克狡猾地说，“是在花园的地上！”
“你怎么知道的？”艾丽大喊。她从朱利安的手里挣脱开来，跳到迪克面前，看起来生气极了。
“就刚刚，你别生气，”迪克说道，一脸诧异。
“你怎么知道了？”艾丽再一次问道，“你还告诉谁了？”
“我没有告诉任何人，”迪克说，他不过是刚才灵光一现突然想到了而已，“所以，你进入了古塔里？你是怎么做到的？”
“艾丽不说。”小女孩突然放声痛哭起来。安妮搂着她，轻轻安慰她。但是艾丽粗鲁地推开了安妮：“是它，大卫去了那里，不是我，不是艾丽。可怜的大卫，里面有只大狗，汪汪地叫，而且……而且……”
“所以，你进去找大卫，对吗？”迪克说，“艾丽真棒，你真勇敢！”
小女孩用一双脏脏的手擦去了泪水，在脸上留下一道道黑色的印痕。她点点头，笑着对迪克重复道：“艾丽真棒！”她又把小狗抱起来，放到腿上难过地说：“可怜的大卫，我亲爱的！”
“所以她进了那座房子，对吗？”朱利安小声地问迪克，“我想知道她是怎么进去的？或许是通过树篱钻进去的。艾丽，我们想去见见这位老太太，我们穿过花园周围的树篱能进去吗？”
“不可以，”艾丽使劲摇了摇头，“栅栏，高高大大的栅栏，会咬人的！”
大家听说栅栏会咬人，都笑了。但是乔治猜中了她的意思：“她指的应该是栅栏带电！他们用栅栏把房子围了起来。天啊！这简直就像一座监狱！大门紧闭，恶犬狂吠，还有通电的栅栏。”
“所以，艾丽到底是怎么进去的呢？”迪克问，“艾丽，你见过这个老太太很多次吗？她见过你吗？”
艾丽没有听懂，所以迪克以更简单的方式，又问了一遍。孩子点点头：“很多次，艾丽见过她，很高，一次，她看见艾丽。她从窗户里扔出来纸，只有一点点。”
“艾丽，你捡起来了吗？”朱利安立刻坐直了，仔细问道，“纸上面写了什么吗？”
大家都在等待艾丽的回答。她点了点头：“是的。就像学校里用钢笔写的字。”
“你看了吗？”迪克问。
艾丽突然惊慌起来。她摇摇头，又点点头。“是的，艾丽看了，”她说，“上面写着‘艾丽早上好，你好吗？’”
“这个老太太认识你吗？”迪克惊讶地说。
“不，她不认识我。只有艾丽的妈妈认识艾丽，”艾丽说，“她在纸上写着‘艾丽真棒，真是个好孩子！’”
“她没有说实话，”迪克说，他发现艾丽说话的时候眼睛并不敢直视他们，“为什么呢？”
“我想我知道原因，”安妮拿出一张纸，在上面清楚地写下“艾丽早上好”，然后递给艾丽说，“读出来，艾丽。”
但艾丽读不出来，她根本不知道纸上写了什么。
“她不识字，”安妮说，“她觉得这很丢脸，所以尽可能地假装。
没关系，艾丽！那位老太太扔下来的纸条，你保留了吗？”
艾丽在她身上仅有的衣服里摸了摸，拿出一张纸。看起来好像是一张书页的一个角。艾丽拿给迪克。
四个孩子全都聚拢来，仔细去解读那难以辨认的文字，看上面都写了什么。
我需要帮助！我被囚禁在自己的房子里，周围一直在发生可怕的事。他们杀了我的儿子！帮帮我，救救我！
布朗温•托马斯
“天啊！”朱利安十分惊骇地说，“这简直太可怕了！你们认为要立刻报警吗？”
“很可能这些小地方，三四个乡村只有一个警察，”迪克说，“还有，这位老太太可能是疯言乱语，她说的不一定是真的。”
“那我们怎么查明这是不是真的呢？”乔治问。
迪克转向艾丽：“艾丽，我们想去见见这个老太太，我们想给她送些好吃的。她一个人孤苦伶仃，伤心极了。你会给我们带路，引导我们进去吗？”
“不可以，”艾丽说，猛烈地摇头，“那里有大狗，长了这样凶恶的牙齿！”说罢，她使劲张大嘴，露出自己洁白的牙齿，这倒让蒂米吓了一跳。孩子们见此忍不住都笑了。
“好吧，我们不能强迫她告诉我们，”朱利安说，“不管怎样，如果我们进去了，那只大狗肯定还在那儿，我可一点都不期待。”
“艾丽给你们带路。”小女孩突然说，这让所有人都大吃一惊，大家都盯着艾丽。
“到房子里去！”迪克说，“但要进去，艾丽你首先得告诉我们入口在哪儿。”
“不，”艾丽说，摇摇头，“艾丽给你们带路。艾丽去过，那里没有大狗！”
就在这时，蒂米开始大叫，有人从门口经过，路过的时候还朝屋内看了看。那人是艾丽的妈妈，这一次是上山带些东西给牧羊人丈夫。她看见艾丽坐在地板上，愤怒地叫了一声。然后站到门口，说了一长串威尔士话，孩子们一个字都没听懂。艾丽吓坏了，径直跑到一个橱柜后面躲了起来，她的小羊和小狗也跟着跑了过去。
但这并没什么用，艾丽的妈妈大步流星地走进来，把艾丽拽了出来，使劲地晃她。蒂米见状，咆哮不止。但是艾丽的小狗和她一样害怕，小羊可怜兮兮地蜷缩在艾丽的怀里。
“我来带艾丽回家！”妈妈生气地说，瞪着这四个孩子，仿佛认为艾丽离家出走和这几个孩子有关，“看我回家怎么收拾你！”
她走出了房间，一手抓着艾丽的手臂，脸上满是怨愤。孩子们根本无计可施。毕竟，她是艾丽的妈妈，而且艾丽整日在乡村里乱晃，确实有些调皮了。
“我觉得，我们最好赶紧回到农场，把一切都告诉摩根，”朱利安下定决心说，“我是认真的！如果这件事情属实，如果老太太真的被囚禁了，我们是无能为力的。但是摩根或许可以帮忙，至少他能叫来警察。别等了，我们下山吧。如果一会儿天黑了，我们可以在农场里睡。抓紧时间，我们马上走！”
Chapter 14 MORGAN IS SURPRISING TOO
Chapter 14 MORGAN IS SURPRISING TOO
George did not particularly want to go down to the farm, as she was afraid of Timmy meeting thefarm dogs again, and being attacked. Julian saw her doubtful face and understood.
'Would you like to stay here by yourself with Timmy, George, till we come back?' he said. 'Youshould be all right with Tim - he'll look after you. The only thing is - will you be scared if any morerumblings and shudderings and shimmerings come again tonight?'
'I'll stay with George,' said Anne. 'It would really be best if you two boys went alone. I'm a bit tiredand I don't think I could go as fast as you'd want to.'
'Right. Then Dick and I will go together, and leave you two girls here with Timmy,' said Julian.
'Come on, Dick. If we hurry, we might get back before dark.'
59
They set off together, and went swiftly down the winding mountain path, still white with snow.
They were glad when at last they saw the farmhouse. A light was already in the kitchen, and lookedvery welcoming!
They went in at the front door, and made their way to the big kitchen, where Mrs. Jones was washingup at the sink. She turned in astonishment when they came in, stamping the snow from their shoes.
'Well now - this is a surprise!' she said, drying her hands on a towel. 'Is there something wrong?
Where are the girls?'
'They're up at the hut - they're fine,' said Julian.
'You have come for something more to eat?' said Mrs. Jones, feeling certain this was the reason fortheir sudden visit.
'No, thank you - we've got plenty!' said Julian. 'We just wondered if we could talk to your son -Morgan. We - well, we've got something to tell him. Something rather urgent.'
'Well now - what could that be?' said Mrs. Jones, all curiosity at once. 'Let me see - yes, Morgan willbe up at the big barn.' She pointed out of the window, where a big and picturesque old barn stood,outlined against the evening sky. 'It is there you will find my Morgan. You will be staying the night,now, will you not? You will like supper - a good supper.'
'Well - yes, we should,' said Julian, suddenly realising that they had missed out tea altogether.
'Thanks awfully. We'll just go and find Morgan.'
They made their way out to the big old barn. Morgan's three dogs at once ran out when they heardstrange footsteps, and growled. But they recognised the boys immediately and leapt round them,barking.
The giant like Morgan came out to see what the dogs were barking about. He was surprised to findthe two boys there, fondling the dogs.
'Hey?' he said, questioningly. 'Anything wrong?'
'We think there is,' said Julian. 'May we tell you about it?'
Morgan took them into the almost dark barn. He had been raking it over and he went on with hisraking as Julian began his tale.
'It's about Old Towers,' said Julian, and Morgan stopped his raking at once. But he went on againalmost immediately, listening without a word.
60
Julian told him his story. He told him about the noises of rumbling, the shimmering in the sky thatDick had seen, the 'shuddering' they had all felt - then about the old woman they had seen in thetower - and how Aily had told of the pieces of paper, and shown them one, which proved that oldMrs. Thomas was a prisoner in her own house.
For the first time Morgan spoke. 'And where is this paper?' he asked in his deep bass voice.
Julian produced it and handed it over. Morgan lighted a lamp to look at it, for it was now practicallydark.
He read it and put it into his pocket. 'I'd rather like it back,' said Julian, surprised. 'Unless you want itto show the police. What do you think about it all? And is there anything we can do? I don't like tothink of...'
'I will tell you what you are to do,' said Morgan. 'You are to leave it to me, Morgan Jones. You arebut children, you know nothing. This matter is not for children. I can tell you that. You must go backto the hut, and you must forget all you have heard and all you have seen. And if Aily comes againyou must bring her down here to me, and I will talk to her.'
His voice was so hard and determined that the two boys were startled and shocked.
'But, Mr. Morgan!' said Julian. 'Aren't you going to do anything about this... go to the police, or...'
'I have told you, this is not a matter for children,' said Morgan. 'I will say no more. You will go backto the hut, and you will say nothing to anyone. If you are not willing to do this, you will go hometomorrow.'
With that the giant of a man put his rake over his shoulder, and left the two boys alone in the barn.
'What do you make of that?' said Julian, very angry. 'Come on - we'll go back to the hut.
I'm not going to the farm for supper. I don't feel as though I want to meet that rude, dour Morganagain this evening!'
Feeling angry and disappointed the boys made their way out of the barn, towards the path that led upto the hill. It was almost dark now, and Julian felt in his pocket for his torch.
'Blow! I didn't bring it with me!' he said. 'Have you one, Dick?'
Dick hadn't one either, and as neither of them felt like making their way up the mountainside in thedarkness Julian decided to go back to the farm, slip up to his bedroom there, and find the extra torchhe had put in one of the drawers.
61
'Come along,' he said to Dick. 'We'll try and get in and out without seeing Morgan or old Mrs.
Jones.'
They went quietly back to the farmhouse, keeping a look-out for Morgan. Julian slipped up the stonestairway to the bedroom he had been given a few nights before, and rummaged in the drawer for historch. Good - there it was!
He went downstairs again - and bumped into old Mrs. Jones at the bottom. She gave a little scream.
'Oh, 'tis you, Julian bach! Now what have you been telling my Morgan to put him into such a temper!
Enough to turn the milk sour his face is! Wait now, while I get you some supper. Would you likesome pork and...'
'Well - we've decided to go back to the hut, after all,' said Julian, hoping that the kind old womanwouldn't be upset. 'The girls are alone, you know - and it's dark now.'
'Oh yes, yes - then you shall go back!' said Mrs. Jones. 'Wait for one minute - you shall have some ofmy new bread, and some more pie. Wait now.'
The boys stood in the doorway, waiting, hoping that Morgan would not come by. They suddenlyheard him in the distance, yelling at a dog, in his loud, really fierce voice.
'Taking it out on the dogs, I suppose,' said Julian to Dick. 'Gosh - I wouldn't like to come up againsthim, if I was one of his men! Strong giant that he is, he could take on a dozen men if he wanted to -or a score of dogs!'
Mrs. Morgan came up with a net bag full of food. 'Here you are,' she said. 'Take care of those girls -and don't go near Morgan now. He's in a fine temper, is my Morgan, and he is not nice to hear!'
The two boys thoroughly agreed. Morgan was not nice to hear. They were glad when they were awayup the path, out of reach of his enormous voice!
'Well, that's that,' said Julian. 'No help to be got from this quarter! And we're forbidden to doanything at all about the matter. As if we were kids!'
'He kept telling us we were only children,' said Dick, sounding disgusted. 'I can't make it out. Ju,WHY was he so annoyed about it all? Didn't he believe us?'
'Oh yes - he believed us all right,' said Julian. 'If you ask me, I think he knows much much more thanwe were able to tell him. There's some kind of racket going on at Old Towers - something 62queer and underhand - and Morgan is in it! That's why he shut us up and told us not to interfere, andto forget all about it! He's in whatever's going on, I'm sure of it.'
Dick whistled. 'My word! So that's why he was so angry. He thought we might be putting a spoke inhis wheel. And of course the last thing he would want us to do would be to go to the police! Well -whatever do we do next, Ju?'
'I don't know. We'll have to talk it over with the girls,' said Julian, worried. 'This would crop up justwhen we're all set for a jolly holiday!'
'Julian, what do you think is going on at Old Towers?' asked Dick, puzzled. 'I mean - it isn't only aquestion of locking up an old lady in a tower - and selling off her goods and taking the money.
It's all the other things too - the rumblings and shudderings and that queer mist.'
'Well - apparently those things have been going on for some time,' said Julian. 'They may havenothing whatever to do with what Morgan is mixed up in - which is, I'm sure, to do with robbing theold lady. In fact, those old tales may be a very good way of keeping people away from the place - inthese country places people are much more afraid of strange happenings than townspeople are.'
'It all sounds very convincing when you put it like that,' said Dick. 'But somehow I don't feelconvinced. I just can't help feeling there's something queer about it all - something we don't know!'
They fell silent after that, walking one behind the other on the mountain path, seeing the big blackstones looming up one after the other in the light of Julian's torch. It seemed a long long way in thedark, much longer than in the daylight.
But at last they saw the light in the window of the hut. Thank goodness! They were both very hungrynow, and were glad that Mrs. Jones had presented them with more food. They could really tuck in.
Timmy barked as soon as they came near, and George let him out of the door. She knew by his barkthat it was the boys coming back.
'Oh, we are glad you came back, instead of staying down at the farm!' cried Anne. 'What happened?
Is Morgan going to the police?'
'No,' said Julian. 'He was angry. He told us not to interfere. He took that bit of paper with the messageon, and never gave it back to us. We think he's mixed up with whatever is going on!'
63
'Very well then,' said George at once. 'We'll take up the matter ourselves! We'll find out what's goingon - and MOST CERTAINLY we'll get poor old Mrs. Thomas out of that tower. I don't know how -but we'll do it! Won't we, Timmy?'
14.摩根怒气冲冲
摩根怒气冲冲
乔治其实并不想回农场，因为她担心蒂米又会碰上农场的狗，又遭遇攻击，朱利安看见她一脸愁容便明白了。
“你愿意和蒂米独自待在这里吗？我们很快就回来，”他说，“你一定要时刻和蒂米待在一起，它会照顾你的。但有一点，如果半夜又传来轰隆声，又四处震动，或者又出现那些奇怪的闪光，你会害怕吗？”
“我和乔治留在这儿，”安妮说，“我想这才是最好的安排。我现在真的很累了，而且我不认为我能赶得上你们俩的步伐。”
“也行！那我和迪克一起去，你们两个女孩和蒂米待在这里，”朱利安说，“迪克，走吧。如果我们足够快的话，天黑之前应该回得来。”
他们赶紧动身，尽管山路上仍覆盖着白雪，他们也飞速地沿着蜿蜒的山路朝山下走去。当农场终于出现在眼前时，他们满是兴奋。厨房里早就点了灯，看起来像是在欢迎他们似的。
他们从前门进去，径直去了大厨房，琼斯太太正在水槽旁边洗碗。她看见两个男孩进来，脸上和鞋子上都是积雪，吃了一惊。
“哇，太意外了！”她说，用毛巾擦了擦手，“发生什么事了吗？
女孩们在哪里？”
“她们还在山上的小屋里，一切平安。”朱利安说。
“你们想吃东西吗？”琼斯太太说，预感这就是他们突然造访的原因。
“不用了，谢谢您。我们吃得很饱！”朱利安说，“我们想知道能不能和摩根聊一聊，我们有话对他说，非常紧急。”
“是什么事呀？”琼斯太太立刻好奇起来，“我想想，对了，摩根现在应该去了那个大谷仓。”她指向窗户外，那里矗立着一座庞大的谷仓，在傍晚的夜里显得静谧庄严。“你们可以在那里找到摩根。今晚你们会留下来吗？我会为你们准备晚餐，一顿丰盛大餐！”
“是的，我们应该会留下，”朱利安说，突然意识到他们已经完全错过了下午茶，“非常感谢。我们现在就去找摩根。”
他们走向大谷仓。摩根的三只狗发觉了陌生的脚步声，叫着跑了出来，但是它们很快认出了男孩们，乖巧地在他们周围打转，叫唤着。
巨人摩根赶紧跑出来看狗在叫什么。看到两个男孩正抚摸着狗，摩根吃了一惊。
“嗯？”他疑惑地问，“是发生什么事了吗？”
“我想是的，”朱利安说，“我们可以告诉您吗？”
摩根把他们带进了几乎漆黑一片的谷仓。他刚刚在筛稻谷，这会儿便一边听朱利安讲一边筛。
“是关于古塔的。”朱利安说，摩根听后立刻放下了手里的活儿。他想了想，一言不发，接着又继续干起手里的工作。
朱利安把故事的来龙去脉都讲了一遍。他讲了轰隆隆的声音，迪克在夜里看见的闪光之物，能感觉到的震动，古塔里的老太太，以及艾丽如何取得那片残纸，最后得知托马斯太太现在被囚禁在自己的房子里。
这一次摩根终于开口说话了，他声音低沉地问道：“纸在哪里？”
朱利安拿出来递给了他。摩根点燃一盏灯仔细查看，因为现在天已经黑得完全看不见字了。
他看了一遍，然后放进了口袋。“我想您得还给我，”朱利安说道，一脸诧异，“除非您能帮忙转交给警察。这件事您有什么看法？
我们能做点什么吗？我不想去……”
“我会告诉你们该做什么，”摩根说，“你们应该把它交给我摩根•琼斯。你们还是孩子，什么都不懂。这件事不该让孩子们来掺和。
我告诉你们，你们必须赶紧返回小屋，忘记所有发生的事情。如果艾丽再来，你们把她带下来找我，我会和她聊聊。”
他说话的语气十分强硬，两个男孩吓了一跳，十分震惊。
“但是，摩根先生！”朱利安说，“您不打算有任何行动吗？去警察局，或者……”
“我刚说了，这件事情孩子们不能掺和，”摩根说，“我不会再说了。你们马上返回小屋，不要再对任何人提起这件事。如果你们不老实的话，我明天就送你们回家。”
这个巨人把犁耙放到了肩头走了出去，把两个目瞪口呆的男孩独自留在谷仓。“你怎么看？”朱利安十分生气地问，“走吧，我们现在就回小屋。我不打算留下吃晚餐了，因为我不想再看见那个粗鲁沉闷的男人了。”
男孩们生气又失望地走出了谷仓，径直朝上山的小路走去。天几乎全黑了，朱利安在口袋里摸了摸，找手电筒。
“完了！我没带手电筒！”他说，“迪克，你带了吗？”
迪克也没带，由于两个人都觉得摸黑上山不大可能，于是朱利安打算返回农场，偷偷潜回自己的卧室，拿走放在抽屉里的备用手电筒。
“走吧，”他对迪克说，“我们试着避开摩根和琼斯太太，返回农场去取。”
他们悄悄溜回农场，格外注意摩根在不在附近。朱利安偷偷爬上了石梯，回到睡了几个晚上的卧室，一顿翻找，所幸在柜子里找到了手电筒！
随后，他便下楼了。结果在楼梯底，一不小心撞上了琼斯太太，吓得琼斯太太大声尖叫。
“天啊，原来是你！我的乖乖，朱利安！你们究竟跟摩根说了什么，惹得他勃然大怒！是把牛奶泼了他一脸吗？再等一会儿，我去准备晚餐，你们想吃猪肉和……”
“对了，太太，我们最后还是打算返回小屋，”朱利安十分抱歉地说，希望善良的琼斯太太不会难过，“女孩们独自留在山上不安全，而且现在天都黑了。”
“也对也对，那你们得抓紧回去，”琼斯太太说，“再等我一分钟，带些新烤好的面包，还有些馅饼，等着别走。”
男孩们站在门口等，希望摩根此时不要出现。但是他们突然听到了摩根从远处传来的声音，他正在呼喊他的狗，听上去十分生气。
“他把气都发泄在狗身上了，”朱利安对迪克说，“如果我在他手下做事，我肯定不敢再顶撞他了！他真的是太强壮了，肯定能以一敌十，或者敌二十多只狗！”
琼斯太太出来了，手里拎了一袋子食物。“拿着，”她说，“好好照顾女孩们，不要再去惹摩根了。他脾气本来挺好的，肯定是听了什么不乐意的事情才这么生气！”
两个男孩完全同意，摩根确实一点都不乐意听。重新踏上回程，他们很是高兴，终于听不见摩根的大嗓门了！
“好吧，就这样吧，”朱利安说，“从这里是得不到任何帮助了！
摩根竟然禁止我们参与此事，就好像我们还是小孩子似的！”
“他不断地告诉我们，我们还只是孩子，”迪克模仿摩根的样子说着，听起来让人很反感，“朱利安，我实在想不通，他到底为什么如此生气呢？是信不过我们吗？”
“不，他应该是相信我们的，”朱利安说，“如果你问我，我想他知道的远比我们告诉他的要多。古塔上整天吵吵闹闹，发生着奇怪又诡异的事情，摩根必定也参与了！这就是为什么他一再阻止我们进去，并且让我们忘掉一切！他肯定是帮凶之一，我敢肯定！”
迪克倒吸一口凉气：“天啊！所以他才会这么生气，他肯定是担心我们会揭发他，他最不愿意看到的就是我们找到警察那里去！那我们接下来怎么办？”
“我也不知道。我们必须去和女孩们商量商量，”朱利安说，“本来预计过一个快乐的假期，但这真是让人始料不及。”
“朱利安，你认为古塔里发生了什么？”迪克困惑地问，“我的意思是，这不仅仅是将一个老太太囚禁在塔楼里，偷走她的财产，拿走她的钱这么简单。还有其他的怎么解释呢？轰隆隆的声音，夜里的震动，还有那团奇怪的迷雾。”
“很显然，这些现象已经持续了一段时间了，”朱利安说，“它们可能和摩根参与的勾当无关，但是肯定和劫持老太太有关。事实上，这些古老的传说是一种很好的掩饰，可以使人们自动远离这个地方。相比于城镇居民而言，乡下人往往更加害怕怪事。”
“你这样解释，听起来很有说服力，”迪克说，“但我还是觉得不够让人信服。我总觉得有些蹊跷，很奇怪，但我们还不知道！”
随后，他们两个都陷入了沉默，一个在前一个在后地走在山路上。在手电筒的照耀下，他们走过一个又一个黑色的标记石。漫长的道路在黑夜里无限延伸，似乎比白天更长了。
但最后，他们终于见到了小屋窗户里透出的亮光。谢天谢地！
他们两个都很饿了，幸好琼斯太太给他们准备了丰盛的食物，终于可以尽情用餐了。
他们一走进来，蒂米就开始叫唤。乔治放开它，任由它朝门口跑去，她知道它的叫声意味着两个男孩回来了。
“你们两个没有留在农场，竟然回来了，这真是太好了！”安妮高兴地说，“怎么样？摩根会去报警吗？”
“不会，”朱利安说，“他很生气，并警告我们不要干涉。他拿走了那张纸条，而且还不还给我。我们认为他肯定参与其中了！”
“真是有一手啊！”乔治立刻说，“那我们自己想办法！我们一定要查明发生了什么事，而且我们一定要把可怜的托马斯老太太从古塔里救出来！尽管现在还不知道怎么办，但我们一定竭尽全力，说到做到！蒂米，你说对不对？”
Chapter 15 WHAT'S UP, TIM?
Chapter 15 WHAT'S UP, TIM?
The four children sat and talked for a long time, sitting round the little oil-stove, eating a goodsupper. What would be the best thing to do? It was all very well for George to flare up and say theywould see to things, they would rescue the old lady from the tower - but how could they even beginto do anything? For one thing they didn't know how to get into the house! No one was going to risk abattle with that fierce dog!
'If only that kid Aily would help us!' said Julian, at last. 'She's really our only hope. It's no good goingto the police - it would take us ages to go down to the village at the bottom of the mountain, and findout where the nearest police station is - and we'd never get a village policeman to believe our tale!'
'I wonder the villagers don't do something about Old Towers,' said Dick, puzzled. 'I mean - all thosepeculiar vibrations we felt last night - and the noises we heard - and the light in the sky when thatmist hung over the place...'
'Yes - but I suppose all those things are seen and heard up here in the mountains much more clearlythan down in the valley below,' said Anne, sensibly. 'I don't expect that queer shuddering would befelt in the valley nor would the rumblings be heard, and even the strange mist over Old Towers mightnot be seen.'
'That's true,' said Julian. 'I never thought of that. Yes - we up here would see a lot... and possibly theshepherd higher up on the hills would, as well. I dare say the farm down below us would seesomething, too... Well, we know they did, because of Morgan's behaviour to us tonight! He obviouslyknew what we were talking about!'
'He's also obviously hand in glove with the men in that place - the big men and little men that Ailyspoke of. Gosh - I wish she'd show us how to get into that house. How does she get in? I'm blowed ifI can think of any way. With that electric fence all round, it sounds impossible.'
64
'The fence that bites!' said George, with a laugh. 'Fancy that child touching the fence and getting ashock. She's an extraordinary little creature, isn't she - quite wild!'
'I hope she didn't get a whipping,' said Anne. 'She is a naughty little truant, of course - but you can'thelp liking her. Does anybody want more cheese? And there are still some apples left - or I couldopen a tin of pears.'
'I vote for the pears,' said Dick. 'I feel like something really sweet. I say - this stay up here is turningout rather exciting, isn't it?'
'We always seem to run into trouble,' said Anne, going to the cupboard to fetch the tin of pears.
'Give it a better name, Anne, old thing,' said Dick. 'Adventure! That's what we're always running into.
Some people do, you know - they just can't help it. And we're those sort of people. Jolly good thingtoo - it makes life exciting!'
Timmy suddenly began to bark, and everyone started up at once. Now what was up?
'Let Timmy out,' said Dick. 'With all these queer goings-on I feel as if it would be just as well to letTim examine anyone coming by here at night!'
'Right,' said George, and went to the door - but as she was about to open it, she heard a dog barkingoutside, just beyond the hut. She swung round.
'I'm not letting Timmy out! That might be Morgan with his dogs! I seem to recognise that deep bark!'
'Someone's coming by,' said Anne, half scared. 'My word - it is Morgan!'
So it was. He passed by the window, and they saw his great shoulders and head bent against the windas he went on up the hill. He didn't even glance in at them - but the three dogs, who were with him,began to bark furiously as they sensed another dog in the hut. Timmy barked back furiously too.
Then all was quiet. Morgan had gone by and the dogs with him. 'Whew - I'm glad you didn't let Timout as I suggested,' said Dick. 'He'd have been torn to pieces!'
'Where do you suppose Morgan's going?' asked Anne. 'It's funny he should be going up the hill -not even in the direction of Old Towers!'
'Probably going to talk to the shepherd,' said Julian. 'He's farther up the hill with his sheep. I say -I wonder if he's in this too!'
'Oh no,' said Anne. 'He's good - I could feel it in my bones. I can't imagine him mixed up with a gangof any sort.'
65
Nobody could, of course. They had all liked the shepherd. But why else would Morgan be going upto him at this time of night?
'He might be going to tell him that we know too much,' suggested Julian. 'He might ask him to keepan eye on us.'
'Or he might be going to complain of Aily, and her doings inside the grounds of Old Towers,'
said Dick. 'Goodness - do you suppose that kid will get into trouble because we told Morgan abouther - and gave him the bit of paper she found?'
They all stared at one another in dismay. Anne nodded soberly. 'Yes - that's it, of course. Aily willcertainly get into trouble over this - oh, why did we think of telling Morgan what we knew?
Poor little Aily!'
They all felt very uncomfortable about Aily. They liked the wild, fey little creature with her pet lamband little dog. Now perhaps she would be well beaten because of what they had told Morgan!
None of them felt like playing cards just then. They sat and talked, wondering if they would hearMorgan coming back. They knew Timmy would bark if he did.
Sure enough he began to bark about half-past eight, and made them all jump. 'That will be Morgancoming back,' said Julian, and they watched the window to see if his head and shoulders would passby again. But they didn't. Neither did any dog bark outside.
Then George saw that Timmy was sitting with his ears pricked up, and his head on one side.
Why? And if he could really hear something, why didn't he bark again? She was puzzled.
'Look at Tim,' she said. 'He's heard something - and yet he's not barking. And he doesn't look veryworried either. What's up, Tim?'
Timmy took no notice. He sat there listening intently, still with his head on one side. What could hehear? It was most tantalising to the others, because not one of them could hear anything at all.
The countryside seemed to be absolutely quiet at that moment.
Then suddenly Tim jumped up and barked joyfully! He ran to the door and whined, scraping at thebottom of it with his paw. He looked back at George and barked again, as if to say 'Buck up!
Open the door!'
'Well!' said Dick, in surprise. 'What's up, Timmy? Has your best friend come to call? Shall we openthe door, Julian?'
66
'I'll go,' said Julian, and went to open the door cautiously. Timmy leapt out at once, barking andwhining.
'There's nobody here,' said Julian, astonished. 'Nobody at all! Hey, Tim, what's all the fuss about?
Give me that torch, Dick, will you? I'll go out after him and see what the excitement is.'
Out he went, and flashed the torch around to find Timmy. Ah - there he was, scraping at the littlewooden bunker that held the oil-cans and the big enamel jug. Julian was astonished.
'Whatever's come over you, Tim?' he said. 'There's nothing here in this bunker - look, I'll lift the lidso that you can peep inside and see, silly dog!'
He lifted up the lid, and shone his torch inside, to show Timmy that it was empty.
But it wasn't! Julian almost let the lid drop down in his surprise! Someone was there - someone smalland half-frozen! It was Aily!
'Aily!' said Julian, hardly believing his eyes. 'What on earth - Aily - what are you doing here?'
Aily blinked up at him, looking scared to death. She clutched the lamb and the dog, and didn't say aword. Julian saw that she was shivering, and crying bitterly.
'Poor little Aily bach!' he said, using the only Welsh word he knew. 'Come into the hut - we'll get youwarm and make you better.'
The child shook her head and clutched her animals closer. But Julian was not going to leave her therein the little oil-bunker on that cold night! He lifted her up, animals and all, and cuddled her.
Aily strove to get free but his arms were strong and held her close.
George's voice came impatiently from the hut. 'Ju! Tim! Where are you? Have you found anything?'
'Yes,' called back Julian. 'We have. We're bringing it along - it's quite a surprise!'
He carried the shivering child into the hut, and the others stared in the utmost astonishment.
Aily! A cold, forlorn and miserable little Aily, pale and shivering! And the lamb and dog too!
'Bring her near the stove,' said Anne, and stroked the child's thin arm. 'Poor Aily!'
Julian tried to set her down, and the animals as well, but she clung to him. She sensed that he wasgood and kind and strong, and his arms were very comforting. Julian sat down on a chair, stillholding the little creature closely. The dog and lamb slid off his knee and ran sniffing round the room.
67
'She was in the oil-bunker out there - she and the lamb and dog,' he said. 'All cuddled up together.
Partly hiding, I should think, and partly for shelter. Maybe she's slept there before, with these two.
Isn't she a poor little mite? She seems very unhappy. Let's give her something to eat.'
'I'll make some hot cocoa,' said Anne. 'George, get some bread and butter and cheese for her -and hadn't we better get the lamb and dog something too? What do you give lambs?'
'Milk out of a bottle,' said Dick. 'But we haven't got a feeding-bottle! I dare say it will lap milk.
Good gracious - the things that happen here!'
Aily felt warm and comforted in Julian's arms. She lay there like a little animal, too cold and tired tobe scared. Julian was glad to hold her and comfort her. Poor little thing - what had made her comethis long way so late at night?
'She must have gone home with her mother,' he said, watching the little dog hobnobbing with adelighted Timmy. 'And probably got a whipping, and was shut up somewhere. And then my guess isthat Morgan went down to see if she was there, and to scold her, and tell her mother to be sure andnot let her out, and...'
'Morgan!' repeated Aily, sitting up in fear, looking all round as if he might be there. 'Morgan!
No! No!'
'It's all right, little thing,' said Julian. 'We'll look after you. Morgan shan't get you!'
'See?' he said to the others. 'I bet I'm right! It was he who went and scared her - and as soon as he wasgone, I expect she escaped from her mother's house and came up here to hide. That horrible fellow! Ifhe shouted at her as he shouted at us, she'd be scared stiff. I bet he was afraid she'd go and give moreof the game away unless she was shut up - might even show us the way into the old house over on theopposite hill!'
Timmy suddenly gave a bark - but not a joyful one this time! Anne cried out at once, 'That may beMorgan coming back! Hide Aily, for goodness sake - or he'll drag her out of here and take her backwith him! Quick - where shall we hide her?'
15.不速之客
不速之客
四个孩子围坐在小油炉旁，一边吃着丰盛的晚餐，一边聊了很久。最好的做法是什么？乔治突然站了起来，义愤填膺地说，这件事情大家不能坐视不理，他们自己要去塔里把老太太给救出来。但是万事开头难，他们如何着手还是个问题。至少孩子们连怎么进入那座房子都不知道！毕竟没人乐意和那只恶狗拼死一战！
“要是艾丽能帮我们就好了！”朱利安最后说，“她是我们唯一的希望。报警并不是最好的，走到山脚要花很长的时间，还要花时间去找警察局，而且乡村警察肯定不会相信我们的‘胡言乱语’的！”
“我觉得凡是和古塔有关的东西，村民们肯定避而远之，”迪克一脸困惑地说道，“我的意思是，昨晚我们感觉到的奇怪震动、听到的噪音以及出现的烟雾，古塔上方天空显现的亮光……”
“你说得对，但是我认为在山上这些东西能显而易见，而山谷里就不一定了。”安妮敏锐地分析着，“我认为在山谷里感觉不到那奇怪的震动和低沉的轰鸣，而且也看不到古塔上空升起的迷雾。”
“确实，”朱利安说，“我没想到这一点。我们现在在这里，所以看到的东西会多一些，或许在山上的牧羊人也会看到这些。而且，我敢说山下的农场也能看见一些东西……他们肯定能，看看摩根昨晚对我们的态度就知道了，很显然他知道我们在说什么！”
“很显然，他和那个地方的人勾结在一起了，就是艾丽口中所说的那些大个子人和小个子人。哎，我真希望她能带我们进入那座房子。她到底是怎么进去的呢？如果我能想到，我肯定吹嘘一番。一想到周围都用带电栅栏围了起来，我就觉得难上加难了。”
“栅栏会咬人！”乔治笑着说，“不敢想象如果艾丽碰到了栅栏，并被电流击倒，会造成什么后果！她真是一个非凡、神奇的小东西，相当狂野！”
“我希望她没有挨鞭子，”安妮说，“尽管她很调皮、淘气，但是还是会让人情不自禁喜欢上她。有人还想要奶酪吗？还剩了些苹果，或者我可以再打开一罐梨。”
“我想吃梨，”迪克说，“我想吃甜甜的东西。大家有没有觉得在这里过夜很刺激？”
“我们似乎总能遇上麻烦。”安妮一边说，一边去橱柜取梨罐头。
“安妮，能不能说得好听点，”迪克说，“这叫冒险！这才是我们经常做的。你也知道，有的人总是忍不住想冒险，而我们就是这类人。这是好事啊，可以让生活精彩纷呈，其乐无穷。”
蒂米突然叫起来，每个人立刻警觉。发生什么事了？
“让蒂米出去看看，”迪克说，“发生了这么多奇怪的事情，我觉得还是把蒂米放出去好一点，让它查探任何一个在夜里路过的人。”
“对，”乔治一边说，一边走到门口准备开门，就在这时她听见门外传来一声狗叫。她立刻转身说：
“我不会让蒂米出去的！很有可能是摩根和他的狗！我记得那狗的叫声！”
“有人来了，”安妮害怕地说，“我的天，真的是摩根！”
没错，摩根正经过窗户，孩子们见他弯下腰，伏下肩，低下头，冒着风雪径直朝山顶走去了。他甚至连头也没回，但是跟在他身后的狗，听见屋内有另一只狗，便开始拼命地狂叫。蒂米也狠狠地咆哮回应。
不久，一切回归沉静，摩根和他的狗已经走远了。“呼——幸好你没有听我的建议把蒂米放出去，”迪克说，“不然肯定就是一场恶战了！”
“你们知道摩根要去哪儿吗？”安妮问，“他竟然上了这座山，而不是往古塔的方向去，这很可笑！”
“或许他是去找牧羊人，”朱利安说，“只有他和他的羊在山顶，难道牧羊人也参与其中了！”
“不，”安妮说，“牧羊人很善良，我从心底里这么觉得。我无法想象他会加入任何不法团伙。”
当然没人这么想过，孩子们都非常喜欢牧羊人。但是这么晚了，摩根还上山找他，是为什么呢？
“他可能是去告诉牧羊人，我们几个知道得太多了，”朱利安分析说，“然后请求牧羊人盯紧我们。”
“或许他去揭发艾丽，以及她在古塔里面做的一切，”迪克说，“天啊，我们会不会给那个孩子惹上了什么麻烦，因为我们把一切都告诉摩根了，连她发现的那张纸条也给了摩根。”
他们惊愕地看着彼此。安妮悲伤地点点头说：“是的，肯定是。
艾丽肯定会因此受连累的。哎，当初为什么会想着要把一切都告诉摩根呢？可怜的艾丽！”
大家都对艾丽的遭遇感到难受。他们很喜欢这个野蛮可爱、活泼好动的小女孩，也喜欢她的小羊和小狗。但是现在，她可能会挨打，因为他们把和艾丽有关的事情都告诉了摩根。
这下没人想玩牌了。他们坐下商量，在想能否听见摩根回来时的动静。因为只要一有人来，蒂米肯定会叫。
果不其然，大约八点半左右，蒂米开始吠叫，把孩子们吓了一大跳。“摩根回来了。”朱利安说。所有的孩子都站到窗户边，去看摩根会不会经过。但是外面什么也没有，也听不见狗叫。
乔治看见蒂米坐在一旁，警觉地竖起两只耳朵，脑袋侧向一边。这是为什么？如果它听见了什么，为什么不叫了呢？乔治很困惑。
“快看蒂米，”乔治说，“它肯定听见什么声响了，但是却安静如常，而且看起来一点也不急躁。怎么了，蒂米？”
蒂米没有注意到乔治的提问。它仍坐在哪儿认真听着，脑袋歪向一边。它听见什么了？孩子们很好奇，因为他们没有一个人能听见。在那一刻，夜色里一片沉寂，鸦雀无声。
突然，蒂米跳了起来，叫得很是欢喜。它摇头晃脑地跑到门口，用爪子一个劲儿地抓门。然后回过头来看着乔治，又叫了一声，好像是在说：“快来！开门！”
迪克惊讶地说：“咦，蒂米你是怎么了？是你的好朋友在呼唤你吗？朱利安，我们要去开门吗？”
“我去开门。”朱利安说，一边小心翼翼打开了房门。蒂米立刻跳了出去，一边小声叫着。
“一个人也没有，”朱利安惊讶地说，“没人啊！蒂米，你在搞什么鬼？迪克，帮忙递一下手电筒好吗？我出去跟着它，看看蒂米到底在激动什么。”
他走了出去，打开手电筒寻找蒂米。蒂米正在用爪子抓那个装着油罐和大搪瓷壶的小木仓。
“蒂米，你到底想干什么？”朱利安疑惑地说，“小木仓里什么都没有。行，我取掉盖布，你自己好好往里瞧瞧。”
他取下盖布，用手电筒往里面照了照，让蒂米看看什么也没有的木仓。
但木仓里并不空空如也！朱利安非常惊讶，手里的盖布差点滑落在地。有人在里面！身形娇小，看起来快被冻僵了！那个人是艾丽！
“艾丽！”朱利安难以置信地叫道，“艾丽，你究竟，你在这里做什么？”
艾丽对他眨了眨眼，看起来被吓坏了。她抱紧了小羊和小狗，一言不发。朱利安看见她冻得瑟瑟发抖，在痛苦地哭泣。
“艾丽真是小可怜！”他说，用上了他知道的唯一一个威尔士语，“我们进屋里去，里面暖和点，你会好很多。”
那孩子摇摇头，把她的小伙伴抱得更紧了。但是朱利安绝不会留她一人在那个小木仓里过夜！朱利安一把抱起了艾丽和她的小伙伴，还一边安慰她。艾丽试图挣脱开，但是朱利安的双臂十分强壮，反而把她抱得更紧了。
小屋里传来了乔治焦虑地呼喊声：“朱利安！蒂米！你们在哪里？有什么发现吗？”
“是的，”朱利安回复说，“我们有发现。我们正把她带回来，保证让你们大吃一惊！”
朱利安把这个瑟瑟发抖的小女孩带进了小屋，其他孩子看见，情不自禁地睁大眼睛，张大嘴，愣在了那里。艾丽冷得浑身颤抖，脸色苍白，孤独无依！她的小羊和小狗也一样。
“让她离炉子近一点，”安妮抚摸着女孩瘦弱的手臂说，“可怜的艾丽！”
朱利安试着把她和小动物们放下，但是她紧紧抓着朱利安不放。艾丽感觉到朱利安至少是善良的、友好的、强壮的，他的手臂是温暖的。于是，朱利安也只好紧紧抱着她，在椅子上坐了下来。
小狗和小羊沿着膝盖滑了下去，在房间里快活地打转。
“她和她的小羊小狗躲在放油的小木仓里，”他说，“她们依偎在一起。我想她是为了藏身，也是为了留宿。或许她们之前也睡在这里，就像一只可怜的小虫。她好像很难过，我们给她拿些吃的。”
“我去做些热可可，”安妮说，“乔治，你去拿些面包，黄油，还有奶酪。我们最好也给小羊和小狗准备些东西吃吧，给羊吃什么好呢？”
“瓶子里有牛奶，”迪克说，“但是我们没有奶瓶喂它！不过它自己肯定会舔。真美好，想想就觉得很亲切。”
待在朱利安的怀里，艾丽感觉温暖又安全。她像只小动物一样依偎着，寒冷和疲惫包围着她，她也顾不上害怕了。朱利安耐心地抱着她，轻声安慰她。可怜的小东西，究竟是什么让她在大半夜到这里来的？
“她肯定和妈妈回家了，”朱利安一边看着小狗和兴奋的蒂米互相打闹，一边说，“很有可能是挨了鞭子，然后被关了起来。接下来，肯定是摩根去了她家，责骂了她，并告诉她妈妈不能让她出门，并且……”
“摩根！”艾丽重复道，一脸惊恐地坐了起来，害怕地看了看四周，生怕他就在周围，“摩根！不！不！”
“没事的，小家伙，”朱利安说，“我们会照顾你的，摩根不会找到你的！”
“看到了吗？”朱利安对其他人说，“我敢打赌我猜对了！他肯定去恐吓艾丽了。摩根一走，艾丽就从妈妈的房子里逃了出来，跑到这里躲起来了。真是个可怕的人！如果他像吼我们一样，吼了艾丽，她肯定被吓得不轻。我敢说摩根肯定害怕艾丽泄露更多的信息，也害怕她给我们带路进入对面的房子！”
蒂米突然叫了一下，这一次听上去并不欢喜！安妮立刻大叫：“很可能是摩根下山了！天啊，赶紧把艾丽藏起来，否则他肯定会把艾丽抓出去带走的！赶快，我们把艾丽藏哪里呢？”
Chapter 16 AILY CHANGES HER MIND
Chapter 16 AILY CHANGES HER MIND
Aily leapt out of Julian's arms as quickly and surely as a cat, when she heard that it might be Morgancoming. She looked round the room like a hunted thing, and then darted to the bunk-beds. With anamazing leap, she was up on one of the top ones in a trice, and pulled a rug over her. She layabsolutely still. The lamb looked up in surprise and bleated.
Then it too leapt up the bunks, as sure-footed as a goat, and cuddled down with its little mistress.
Only Dave the dog was left below, whining miserably. 'Gosh!' said Dick, amazed at these incrediblysudden happenings. 'Look at that! Did you ever see such leaping! Shut up barking, Tim. We want tohear if Morgan is coming. Ju - where shall we hide Aily's dog? He mustn't be seen - or heard either!'
Julian lifted the dog up to the top bunk and put him with the other two there. 'That's about the onlyplace where he'll keep quiet!' he said. 'Aily - lie quite still till we tell you everything is safe.'
There was no reply from the bunk - not a word or a bark or a bleat. Then Timmy began to bark loudlyagain, and ran to the door.
'I'm going to lock the door,' said Julian. 'I'm not having Morgan and his dogs in here, hunting forAily! My guess is that he knows she's escaped from her mother's - or maybe she ran off when hescolded her - and thinks she went to her father, the old shepherd! He's got to get hold of her, to stopher from spreading what she knows!'
'Well - for goodness sake don't let those dogs in here!' said George, desperately. 'I can hear thembarking away in the distance.'
'Quick - let's sit round the table with the cards, and pretend to be playing a game!' said Dick,snatching the cards from a shelf. 'Then if Morgan looks in, he'll think everything is normal - andwon't guess we've got Aily here. I bet he'll be sly enough to try and peep in without us seeing him -hoping to spot Aily if we've got her!'
They sat round the table, and Dick dealt out the cards. Anne's hands were trembling, and George felta bit weak at the knees. Anne kept dropping her cards, and Dick laughed at her.
'Butterfingers! Cheer up - Morgan won't eat you! Now - if I suddenly say 'What ho!' you'll know I cansee Morgan peeping in at the window, and you must laugh and play like anything. See?'
69
Dick was the one facing the window, and he kept a sharp eye on it as they played snap. There was nosound of dogs barking now, though Tim sat by the door, his ears cocked, as if he could hearsomething.
'Snap!' said Julian, and gathered up the cards. They went on playing.
'Snap! I say, don't grab like that - you've almost broken my nail!'
'Snap! I said it first!'
'What ho!' said Dick, and that put everyone on their guard at once. They went on playing, but withoutgiving much attention to the game now. What could Dick see?
Dick could see quite a lot. He could see a shadowy face some way from the window, looking in -yes, it was Morgan all right.
'What ho!' said Dick again, to warn the others that there was still danger. 'WHAT HO!'
Morgan's face had now come quite near to the window. He evidently thought that no one saw him,and that they were all too engrossed in their game to notice anything else. His eyes swept the roomfrom corner to corner. Then his face disappeared.
'He's gone from the window,' said Dick, in a low voice. 'But go on playing. He may come to thedoor.'
KNOCK! KNOCK!
'Yes - there he is,' said Dick. 'Ju - you take charge now.'
'Who's there?' yelled Julian.
'Morgan. Let me in,' said Morgan's deep, growling voice.
'No - we've got our dog here, and we don't want him set on again,' said Julian, determined not to letMorgan in at any cost.
Morgan turned the handle - but the door was locked. He growled again.
'Sorry! But we can't unlock it!' shouted Julian. 'Our dog might rush out and bite you. He's growlinglike anything already!'
'Bark, Tim,' said George, in a low voice, and Timmy obligingly barked the place down!
Morgan gave up. 'If you see Aily, send her home,' he said. 'She's gone again, and her Mam's worried.
I've been looking for her this cold night.'
'Right!' called Julian. 'If she comes we'll give her a bed here.'
'No. You send her home,' shouted Morgan. 'And pay heed to what I told you down at the barn there,or it will be the worse for all of us!'
70
'For all of us! I like that!' said Dick, in disgust. 'It will certainly be the worse for him and his friendswhen the secret's out! Awful fellow! Has he gone, Tim?'
Timmy came away from the door and lay down peacefully. He gave a little bark as if to say 'Allclear!'
When dogs began to bark right away in the distance Tim took no notice. 'That means they're goingdown the hill with Morgan, back to the farm,' said George, thankfully. 'We can get Aily down now,and give her something to eat.'
She went to the bunk. 'Aily!' she called. 'Morgan is gone. Gone right away! Come down and have ameal. We will give the lamb some milk and your dog some meat and biscuits!'
Aily's head peered cautiously over the side of the little bunk-bed. With a leap she was down on thefloor, as lightly as the lamb itself, which followed at once, landing squarely on its four tiny hooves.
The little dog had to be lifted out - he was much too scared to jump!
To everyone's amusement, Aily ran straight to Julian, and held up her arms to be taken into his.
She felt safe with this big kind boy. He sat down with her on his knees and she cuddled up to him likea kitten.
George put some bread and butter and cheese on the table in front of her, and Anne put down a dishof milk for the lamb, which lapped it greedily but most untidily. The dog tried to get the milk too, butsoon went to the dish of cut-up meat and biscuits put down by Anne.
'There - the Aily-family is fed,' she said. 'My word - what an excitement all this is! Julian, don't letAily gobble like that - she'll be sick. I never did see anyone eat so quickly. She can't have hadanything since the bit of cheese we gave her this afternoon!'
Aily snuggled back into Julian's arms contentedly, when she had eaten every scrap of her meal.
She looked up at him, wanting to please him.
'Aily tell how to get into big big house,' she said suddenly, taking everyone completely by surprise.
Julian looked down at her. He had the dog on his knee now too, though he would not allow the lambto climb on as well.
'Aily tell me?' he said gravely. 'Good little Aily bach!'
Aily began to try and tell him. 'Big hole,' she began. 'Down, down, down...'
'Where's this big hole?' asked Julian.
'High up,' said Aily. 'Down it goes down...'
'But where is it?' asked Julian again.
71
Aily went off into a long jabber of Welsh and the children listened helplessly. How maddening tohave Aily willing to tell them her secret - and then not to be able to follow what she said.
'Good little Aily,' said Julian, when she came to a stop at last. 'Where is this big big hole?'
Aily gazed at him in reproach. 'Aily tell you, tell you, tell you!' she said.
'Yes, I know - but I don't understand Welsh,' said Julian, gently, despairing of trying to make thechild understand. 'Where is this big hole - that's all I want to know.'
Aily stared at him. Then she smiled. 'Aily show,' she said, and slipped off his knee. 'Aily show!
Come!'
'Good gracious! Not now,' said Julian. 'Not in all this snow and darkness. No, Aily - tomorrow -in the morning - not now!'
Aily took a look out of the window into the darkness. She nodded. 'Not now. In the morning, yes?
Aily show in morning.'
'Well, thank goodness that's settled!' said Julian. 'I'd dearly love to see this big big hole whatever it is,now, straightaway - but we'd only get lost on these hills in the dark. We'll look forward to ittomorrow!'
'Good!' said Dick, yawning. 'I must say that I think that's best too. What a bit of luck that Aily's sograteful to you, Ju! I believe she'd do anything in the world for you now.'
'I believe she would too, funny little creature,' said Julian, looking at Aily as she curled up on the rugnear the stove, with her lamb and dog beside her. 'How could Morgan scare such a harmless littlething? He's a brute!'
'Jolly good thing he didn't see her when he looked in,' said George. 'He'd probably have broken thedoor down! One blow of his fist and it would have cracked from top to bottom!'
Everyone laughed. 'Well - good thing it didn't come to that!' said Julian. 'Now then, let's get to bed.
We may have quite an exciting day tomorrow!'
'I hope we manage to get to that poor old woman in her tower,' said Anne. 'That's the most importantthing to do. Aily, you can sleep in that topmost bunk, where you hid. I'll give you some rugs, and ablanket and a pillow.'
It wasn't long before the hut was quiet and peaceful, with all five children in their bunks, and Timmywith George. The lamb and the little dog were with Aily. Julian looked out from his bunk and smiled.
What a collection of people and animals in the hut tonight! Well - he was quite glad there were twodogs!
72
No one woke in the night except George. She felt Timmy stir and sat up, resting on her elbow.
But he didn't bark. He gave her a small lick, and sat with her, listening.
The queer rumbling noise was coming again - and then the 'shuddering', though not so strongly asbefore. George felt the wooden edge of her bunk - it vibrated as if machinery was in the room below,shaking everything a little.
She leaned out of her bunk and looked out of the window. Her eyes widened as she saw what Dickhad seen the other night - the 'shimmering' in the sky. She could think of no other name for thatstrange quivering that rose and rose and finally ended very high up indeed, seeming to lose itself inthe stars, that were now shining brightly.
George didn't wake the others. As soon as the queer happenings stopped, she lay down again.
Perhaps tomorrow they would know what caused such strange things - yes, tomorrow would be veryexciting!
16.艾丽说出了秘密
艾丽说出了秘密
一想到来的人有可能是摩根，艾丽立马从朱利安的手臂中挣脱，动作敏捷得像猫一样。她像狩猎般环顾四周，然后冲向了双层床的方向。只一瞬间，她便跳跃攀爬到了上铺，用毯子盖住了自己。在毛毯底下，她一动不动。小羊在底下惊讶地抬头看着艾丽，咩咩直叫。
随后，它也跳了上去，正如山羊那样矫健，然后依偎在小主人的怀里。只有艾丽的小狗还在地面上愤愤呜咽。“天啊！”迪克说，对眼前发生的一切简直难以置信，“你们看到了吗！看到她一步就跳上去了没！蒂米，安静点别叫了，我们想听听摩根来了没。朱利安，我们该把艾丽的狗藏在哪里呢？它也不能被发现的，也不能让它发出任何声音来！”
朱利安把小狗举起来，放到了艾丽身边。“这是唯一一个能让它安静下来的地方！”他说，“艾丽，躺着别动，直到我们来叫你。”
床上顿时没有了任何动静，没有说话、没有狗叫、没有呜咽。
然后，蒂米又跑到门口，开始狂叫。
“我要锁上门，”朱利安说，“我不会让摩根和他的狗进来带走艾丽的！我猜他肯定知道艾丽从家里逃走了，或者在他斥骂艾丽的时候，艾丽跑掉了。摩根认为艾丽会去找她的牧羊人父亲！所以他上山是为了把艾丽抓回去，好阻止她把事情说出去。”
“对！别让这些狗进来！”乔治绝望地说，“我大老远就能听见它们的吠叫。”
“快，大家围在桌子周围拿起牌，假装我们在玩游戏！”迪克说，顺手从架子上拿了一副牌，“如果摩根往里面看，他会觉得一切如常，就猜不到我们把艾丽藏在这里了。我猜，他肯定十分狡猾，会趁我们不注意，窥视屋内，查探艾丽的迹象。”
他们围坐在桌前，迪克开始发牌。安妮的手不自主地发抖，乔治也感觉有点腿软。安妮现在开始手软了，牌也拿不住了，迪克嘲笑她说：
“真是笨手笨脚！振作一点，摩根又不会吃了你！记着，如果我待会儿突然说‘什么鬼’，就是在告诉你们摩根在偷窥我们，我们必须有说有笑，装作若无其事的样子，知道了吗？”
迪克面向窗户坐着，和他们玩牌的同时，也不忘紧盯着窗户。
现在外面没有狗叫声了，但是蒂米仍坐在门口，竖起耳朵，它好像还能听到点什么。
“我赢了！”朱利安一边说，一边重新洗牌，开启新一局游戏。
“是我赢了！我说，不要这样抓，我的指甲都快被你弄断了！”
“是我赢了！我第一个说的！”
“什么鬼！”迪克说，这让每个人都高度警惕起来。大家继续游戏，但心思都不在游戏上了。迪克看见什么了？
迪克看得一清二楚，他看见一张模糊的脸正透过窗户在往屋里看。是的，就是摩根！
“什么鬼啊！”迪克又说了几遍，来警告小伙伴们门外的危险还在，“什么鬼！”
摩根的脸凑近了窗户，他以为孩子们都没发现他，正沉浸于自己的游戏当中。他扫视了房间的每一个角落，然后他的脸消失了。
“他离开了，”迪克低声说，“但是我们继续玩，他可能会到门口来。”
“咚咚咚！”“咚咚咚！”
“他来了，”迪克说，“朱利安，现在你来应付他。”
“谁呀？”朱利安大喊。
“摩根。”摩根低沉地说，声音里略带一丝愤怒，“让我进去。”
“不行，我们的狗在门口，我们不想让它再次受到伤害。”朱利安说道，决心不惜任何代价也不让摩根进来。
摩根转了转门把手，但是门被锁上了，他又愤怒地咆哮起来。
“抱歉！但是我们不能不锁！”朱利安大喊，“我们的狗可能会冲出来，咬伤你，它已经蠢蠢欲动了。”
“蒂米，叫！”乔治小声说。蒂米听话地朝门外大声咆哮起来！
摩根放弃了。“如果你们看见艾丽，就送她回家，”他说，“她又离家出走了，她的妈妈很担心。我是在寒夜里帮忙出来找她的。”
“好的！”朱利安回答说，“如果她来了，我们会给她铺一张床。”
“不行，你们要立刻送她回家，”摩根大喊，“记住下午我在谷仓对你们说的话，不然我们所有人都要完蛋！”
“所有人！我就喜欢这样！”迪克满是厌恶地说，“当秘密公之于众的时候，对他和他的同伙来说才是真的完蛋！恶心的家伙！蒂米，他走了吗？”
蒂米从门口走了回来，平静地躺下，轻轻叫了一声，仿佛在说：“没事了。”
当狗叫声再次从远处传来，已经不能引起蒂米的注意了。“这意味着它们已经和摩根一起下山回农场了。”乔治大舒一口气，“我们可以让艾丽下来，给她弄些吃的了。”
乔治走到床边，轻轻唤道：“艾丽！摩根走了，走得远远的了！
下来吃饭吧！我们给小羊准备了一些牛奶，给小狗准备了一些肉和饼干！”
艾丽露出脑袋小心翼翼地环顾了四周。随后她纵身一跃，四肢着地，稳稳落到了地上，犹如紧随其后的小羊一样矫健轻盈。那只小狗必须要抱下来，它看起来很害怕从高处跳下！
让大家意外的是，艾丽径直朝朱利安跑了过去，举起他的胳膊，钻进他的怀里。在这个大男孩身边，她感觉很安全。朱利安坐下，把她抱起来放到膝盖上，艾丽像一只小猫一样依偎在朱利安怀里。
乔治在艾丽面前的桌子上放了些面包、黄油、奶酪，安妮为小羊放了一碗牛奶，小羊贪婪地舔食，弄得一地都是。小狗也想喝牛奶，但很快就去吃安妮为它准备的肉和饼干了。
“我们养活了艾丽一家，”安妮说，“这太让人激动了！朱利安，别让艾丽那样狼吞虎咽，她会噎住的，我从没见过有人吃得这么快。今天中午，我们给她的那块奶酪吃完之后，她可能什么也没吃！”
当艾丽吃得一干二净，她又钻回了朱利安的怀抱，心满意足。
她抬头看着朱利安，希望能逗他开心。
“艾丽说如何进大大房子。”她突然开口说道，这让每个人都惊诧万分。朱利安低头看了看她，现在他腿上又爬上来一只小狗。他绝不会让小羊再往他身上爬的。
“艾丽要告诉我？”他惊喜地说，“小艾丽真棒，真是小能手！”
艾丽开始告诉他：“大洞，下，下，下……”
“这个大洞在哪里？”朱利安问。
“高，”艾丽说，“通往下面……”
“但是它在哪儿？”朱利安又问了一遍。
艾丽接着说了一长串威尔士语，孩子们感到失望又无助。好不容易艾丽答应告诉大家这个秘密，结果又听不懂艾丽的话。真让人抓狂！
“好艾丽，”艾丽说完，朱利安又问，“那个大大的洞在哪儿呢？”
艾丽责备地凝视他：“艾丽告诉你，告诉你，告诉你了！”
“是的，我知道。但是我听不懂威尔士语，”朱利安轻轻地回答，无奈又努力地想让这个孩子听懂他的话，“大大的洞在哪里？我只想知道这个。”
艾丽盯着他，然后笑了。“艾丽带你去，”她说，然后从他腿上滑下来，“艾丽带你去！走吧！”
“太好了！但不是现在，”朱利安说，“现在外面漆黑一片，到处都覆盖了白雪。今天不去了，艾丽。明天早上，现在不去！”
艾丽看了看窗外，确实一片漆黑。她点了点头说：“现在不去。
早上好吗？艾丽早上带你们去！”
“太好了，就这么决定了！”朱利安说，“我还真想现在就直接去瞧瞧这个大洞，管它是什么。但是夜晚在山里走很容易迷路，所以我们还是明天再去！”
“好！”迪克一边说，一边打了个哈欠，“我也认为这是最好的选择。艾丽现在对你不胜感激，你真是走运了，我敢说她现在愿意为你做任何事。”
“我也相信她会，真是可爱有趣的小家伙，”朱利安一边说，一边看着蜷缩在火炉旁地毯上的小艾丽，旁边还有她的小羊和小狗，“摩根怎么能恐吓这么一个可怜的小东西？他太残忍了！”
“幸好他往里面瞧的时候没看见艾丽，”乔治说，“不然，他肯定要把门给拆了！他一拳头挥下来，门肯定从上到下都会裂开！”
大家都笑了。“是的，好在没有像你说的那样！”朱利安说，“现在，我们都去睡觉吧。明天真的任重而道远呢！”
“希望我们能顺利见到那位可怜的老太太，”安妮说，“那是最重要的。艾丽，你可以睡在那张上铺，你藏身的那张床。我给你拿些毯子、被单和枕头。”
没过多久，小屋归于宁静，孩子们都回到了自己的小床上。朱利安从床边伸出脑袋，看到蒂米紧挨着乔治趴着，小羊和小狗紧靠在艾丽身边，心里不禁美滋滋的。今晚可真是一个大聚会啊，尤其这房间里还有两位狗狗护卫！
夜里，大家都睡得很熟，除了乔治。她感觉到蒂米在她身边动来动去，便坐了起来，用一只手撑着打盹。蒂米并没有叫，它轻轻舔了舔乔治，和她一起坐着，听着。
奇怪的轰隆声又来了，接着又是震动频频，不过没有之前强烈。乔治感觉到床沿明显在震动，就好像有机器在这间房子底下工作，把整个屋子都弄得一起摇晃。
乔治俯身轻轻下了床，站到窗户边往外看。刹那间，她睁大了双眼，此时此刻她也看到了迪克前一晚所说的天空中“闪闪发光”的东西。她实在想不出要怎么描述这种奇怪的光，它慢慢上升，一直上升，直到在高空中消失不见，就好像藏身于闪闪发光的群星中去了。
乔治没有叫醒其他人。奇怪的事情一结束，她也躺下睡了。或许，明天就能揭开这些谜团的谜底了。是的，明天，让我们拭目以待！
Chapter 17 THE BIG, BIG HOLE
Chapter 17 THE BIG, BIG HOLE
Next morning everyone was awake early. They had slept well, and were full of beans - and excited tothink that an adventure lay ahead. To get into that old house, with its many secrets, would bemarvellous!
Aily followed Julian about the room like a little dog. She wanted to have her breakfast on his knee,just as she had had her supper the night before, and he let her. He was ready to do anything shewanted - if only she would show them the way into Old Towers!
'We'd better set off pretty soon,' said Anne, looking out of the window. 'It's snowing pretty fast again- we don't want to get lost!'
'No. That's true. If Aily is going to take us across country, we shan't have the faintest idea wherewe're going, in this heavy snow!' said Julian, rather anxiously.
'I'll just clear up a bit, then we'll go, shall we?' said Anne. 'Do we take any food with us, Ju?'
'We certainly do - all of us,' said Julian, at once. 'Goodness knows what time we'll get back to thishut. George, you make sandwiches with Anne, will you? And put in some bars of chocolate too, andsome apples if there are any left.'
73
'And for pity's sake, remember your torches,' said Dick.
Aily watched while the sandwiches were made, and scraped up the bits that fell on the table to give toDave, her small dog. The lamb frisked about, quite at home, getting into everyone's way.
But nobody minded it - it was such a charming little long-leggitty creature!
At last all the sandwiches were made and put into two kit-bags. The hut was cleared up and tidied,and the children got into their out-door clothes.
'I think it would be easiest to toboggan down the slope, and half-way up Old Towers' slope,' saidJulian, looking out into the snow. 'It would take us ages to walk - and it's no good skiing, becauseAily hasn't any skis - and couldn't use them if she had!'
'Oh yes - let's take the toboggans!' said George, pleased. 'What do we do with the lamb? Leave ithere? And must we take Dave the dog, too?'
However, that was not for them to settle! Aily absolutely refused to go without her lamb and dog. Shegathered them up into her arms, looking mutinous, when Julian suggested they should be left in thewarm hut. Neither would she allow herself to be wrapped up warmly - and only consented to wear ascarf and a woollen hat because they happened to be exactly the same as Julian was wearing!
They set off at last. The snow was still falling, and Julian felt seriously doubtful whether they wouldbe able to find their way down the hill and up the other slope without losing their sense of direction.
The toboggans were rather crowded! Julian and Dick were on the first one, with Aily and the lambbetween them, and Anne and George were on the second one, with Timmy and Dave between them.
George was at the front, and Anne had the awkward job of hanging on to both the dogs and keepingher balance too!
'I know we shall all roll off,' she said to George. 'Good gracious - I half wish we had waited a bit!
The snow is falling very fast now!'
'Good thing!' called Julian. 'No one will spot us when we are near Old Towers - they won't be able tosee a thing through this snow!'
Julian's toboggan shot off down the snowy slope. It gathered speed, and the boys gasped in delight atthe pace. Aily clung to Julian's back, half frightened, and the lamb stared with astonished eyes, notdaring to move from its place, squashed in between Aily and Julian!
74
Whooooooosh! Down the slope to the bottom, and up the opposite slope, gradually slowing down!
Julian's toboggan came to a stop, and then, not far behind, came George's, slowing down too. Georgegot out and dragged her toboggan over to Julian.
'Well,' she said, her face glowing, 'what do we do now? Wasn't that a wonderful run?'
'Wonderful!' said Julian. 'I only wish we could have a few more! Did you like that, Aily?'
'No,' said Aily, pulling her woollen cap to exactly the same angle that Julian wore his. 'No. It makemy nose cold, so cold.'
She cupped her hand over her nose to make it warm. George laughed.
'Fancy complaining about a cold nose when she's hardly wearing anything on her skinny little body -you'd think the whole of her would feel cold - not just her nose!'
'Aily - do you know where the big hole is?' asked Julian, looking about in the snow. The snowflakeswere quite big now, and nothing that was more than a few yards away could be seen.
Aily stood there, her feet sinking into the snow. She looked all round, and Julian felt certain that shewas going to say that she didn't know which way to go, in this thick snow. Even he was ratherdoubtful which was the way back up the hill!
But Aily was like a dog. She had a sure sense of direction, and could go from one place to another ona dark night or in the snow without any difficulty at all!
She nodded. 'Aily know - Dave know, too.'
She walked a few steps, but her feet sank into the snow above her ankles, and her thin shoes weresoon soaked through.
'She'll get her feet frost-bitten,' said Dick. 'Better put her on one of the toboggans and pull her, Ju.
Pity we didn't have any snow- boots small enough to lend her. I say - this is a bit of a crazyexpedition, isn't it! I hope to goodness Aily knows where she's taking us. I haven't the foggiest idea atthe moment which is east or west, north or south!'
'Wait - I've got a compass in one of my pockets,' said Julian, and did a lot of digging in his clothes.
At last he pulled out a small compass. He looked at it.
'That's south,' he said, pointing, 'so that's where Old Towers Hill is - south is directly opposite ourhut; we know that because the sun shone straight in at our front windows. I reckon we walk this way,then - due south.'
'Let's see which way Aily points,' said Dick. He set her on his toboggan, and wrapped her scarf moreclosely round her. 'Now - which way, Aily?'
75
Aily at once pointed due south. Everyone was most impressed.
'That's right,' said Julian. 'Come on, Dick - I'll pull Aily's toboggan, you can pull the girls' for them.'
They all set off up the rest of the slope of Old Towers Hill, Aily on the toboggan with Dave and Fanythe lamb, and Timmy sitting in state on George's toboggan, the girls walking behind.
Timmy was enjoying himself. He didn't like the way his legs went down into the snow when he triedto run - it was much easier to sit on the toboggan and be pulled along!
'Lazy thing!' said George, and Timmy wagged his tail, not caring a bit what anyone said!
Julian looked at his compass as he went, and walked due south for some time. Then Aily gave a call,and pointed to the right.
'That way, that way,' she said.
'She wants us to go westwards now,' said Julian, stopping. 'I wonder if she's right. By my reckoningwe're going dead straight for Old Towers now - but we shall be going up the hill to the right of it, ifwe go her way.'
'That way, that way,' repeated Aily, imperiously, and Dave barked as if to say she was right!
'Better follow her way,' said Dick. 'She seems so jolly certain of it.'
So Julian swerved to the right a little, and the others followed. They went a good way up the steephill, and Julian began to pant.
'Is it far now?' he asked Aily, who was petting her lamb, and apparently taking no notice of the waythey were going. Not that there was anything much to take notice of, except snow on the ground andsnowflakes in the air!
Aily looked up. Then she pointed again, a little more to the right, and said something in Welsh,nodding her head.
'Well - it looks as if we're getting near this place of hers - this 'big, big hole', whatever it is,' saidJulian, and on he went.
In about a minute Aily suddenly leapt off the toboggan, and stood there, looking round with a frown.
'Here,' she said. 'Big hole here.'
'Well - it may be - but I'd like to see it a bit more clearly, Aily,' said Julian. Aily began to scrapedown through the snow, and Timmy and Dave obligingly went to help her, imagining that she wasafter rabbits or a hidden hare.
76
'I'm afraid the poor kid's led us on a wild-goose chase,' said Dick. 'Why should there be a big big holehere?'
Timmy and Aily had now got down through the snow to the buried clumps of heather that grew allover the slopes of the mountains in that district. Julian could see the clumps sticking up, stiff andwiry, in the clearing that Aily and the dogs had made.
'Timmy - you take Timmy!' said Aily suddenly to George. 'He fall down, down - he fall like Daveone day - down down!'
'I say! I believe she's looking for an old pot-hole!' said Dick, suddenly. 'You know - those strangeholes that are sometimes found on moors - sudden holes that drop right down underground.
They're called dean-holes I think, in some places. We found one once on Kirrin Island - don't youremember?'
'Oh yes - that was in the heather too!' said George, remembering. 'And it led to a cave below, by theseashore! That's what Aily meant by a big big hole! A pot-hole on the moors! Timmy - for goodnesssake come away - you may drop right down it!'
Timmy very nearly did go down the hole! George just caught his collar in time! But Dave was wary -he had fallen down once before!
'Hole!' said Aily, pleased. 'Big big hole! Aily find for you!'
'Well - certainly you've found your hole - but how does it get us into Old Towers?' said Dick.
Aily didn't understand. She knelt there, looking down at the hole she had uncovered under the heatherand the snow.
'I must say that was a marvellous feat,' said Julian. 'Coming straight to this place and finding the holewhen she couldn't see a thing through the falling snow. She really is as good as a dog. Good littleAily bach!'
Aily gave one of her sudden smiles, and slipped her hand in Julian's.
'Go down, yes?' she said. 'Aily show way?'
'Well - we'd better go down if it's possible,' said Julian, not much liking the idea, for he could seenothing but darkness inside the hole, and had no idea of what lay below.
Fany the lamb was tired of waiting about. She gave a little leap to the edge of the big round hole, andthen put her small head in. She kicked up her heels - and was gone!
'She's jumped into the hole!' said George, amazed. 'Here, wait, Aily - you can't jump too - you'll hurtyourself!'
But Aily slithered into the hole, then let herself go.
'Aily here,' came a small voice from below. 'You come quick!'
17.大大的洞穴
大大的洞穴
第二天，孩子们都醒得很早。看来大家昨晚都睡得很好，个个精神饱满，一想到前方将迎来一场冒险就激动不已。进入到那座老房子，揭开它的秘密，光是想想就让人迫不及待了。
艾丽一起床就跟在朱利安后面，像小狗一样紧追不舍。她想要像昨晚一样坐在他的腿上吃早餐，朱利安同意了。只要艾丽为他们带路进入古塔，他愿意为她做任何事情。
“我们最好尽快出发，”安妮看着窗外，说，“现在雪下得很大，我们可不能再迷路了。”
“你说得对！如果艾丽要带我们横穿整个乡村，我们不可能在大雪里长途跋涉，那就太愚蠢了！”朱利安焦虑地说。
“我稍微收拾一下，我们就出发，行吗？”安妮说，“朱利安，我们要带些食物吗？”
“当然，我们每个人都带些，”朱利安立刻回答说，“天知道我们什么时候能回来。乔治，你和安妮一起做三明治，可以吗？带点巧克力棒，如果还有苹果的话，也带几个。”
“对了，以防万一，记得带上手电筒。”迪克说。
艾丽站在一旁看安妮做三明治，一有食物碎料掉到桌子上，她就抓走喂她的小狗大卫。那只小羊倒是自由自在，在屋子里到处乱窜，把每个人的路都挡了一遍。但是没人介意，毕竟这只小东西如此可爱调皮又惹人疼爱。
最后，所有的三明治都做好了，安妮把三明治分别放进两个包装袋里。小屋也很快打扫干净，孩子们都穿上了厚厚的户外大衣。
“我认为坐雪橇滑下这个斜坡，再借助惯性爬一截对面的斜坡会让我们省力很多，”朱利安说，看了看屋外的大雪，“如果单凭步行，可能要走上好几个小时。而且现在的情况不适合用滑雪板，毕竟艾丽没有滑雪板，而且就算有多余的给她，她也不会用。”
“对，我们坐雪橇吧！”乔治高兴地说，“那小羊怎么办呢？把它留在这里？我们必须带上大卫这只小狗吗？”
然而，这根本由不得他们决定！艾丽绝不会丢下小羊和小狗不管。当朱利安建议把它们都留在小屋的时候，她用手臂把它们圈起来，看上去十分生气。而且，她坚决反对加衣服保暖，唯独同意围一条围巾和戴一顶羊毛帽子，因为这两件刚好和朱利安身上的一模一样。
他们终于出发了。雪还在不停地下，朱利安感到十分不安，严重怀疑他们能否顺利找到下山的路，上到对面的斜坡。
雪橇上真是太拥挤了！朱利安和迪克坐在第一个，艾丽和小羊坐在他们中间；安妮和乔治坐上了第二个，蒂米和大卫坐在她们中间。乔治坐在雪橇的前面，安妮肩负重任，必须得照看两只狗，自己还得注意保持平衡。
“我们肯定会打滚的，”安妮对乔治说，“天啊，我还是希望我们能稍微等一等，现在雪下得太猛了！”
“雪下得大正合我意！”朱利安说，“这样我们在靠近古塔的时候，就不会被发现了。大雪遮蔽视线，什么也看不清。”
朱利安的雪橇沿着雪坡一跃而下，雪橇越滑越快，男孩们大口喘气，欣喜若狂。艾丽被吓坏了，紧紧抱着朱利安；小羊睁大双眼，盯着前方，一动也不动，挤在艾丽和朱利安中间。
“呜……呼！”雪橇滑到坡底，又朝对面的斜坡爬上去，速度逐渐变慢。最后，朱利安的雪橇终于停了下来，不远处，乔治她们也跟上来了，速度也慢慢减下来。乔治走下雪橇，拉着雪橇向朱利安走去。
“好了，”乔治脸上神采奕奕，说，“现在做什么？继续奇妙之旅？”
“当然！”朱利安说，“希望能再来几个回合！艾丽你喜欢吗？”
“不，”艾丽一边说，一边按着朱利安戴帽子的方式，挪了挪自己的毛线帽，“不喜欢。它让我的鼻子变冷，好冷。”
说着她用手捂住自己的鼻子，好让它暖和一点。乔治见此，开心地笑了。
“她瘦弱的身体，光溜溜的皮肤上几乎都没什么厚衣物保暖，她竟然只抱怨鼻子冷，简直不可思议。明明会让你觉得她全身都冷，而不仅仅只是鼻子！”
“艾丽，你知道那个大大的洞在哪里吗？”朱利安问，四周都覆盖着皑皑白雪。此时，雪下得又猛又急，能见度只有几米远。艾丽站在那儿，双脚已经陷入雪中。她环顾四周，朱利安暗想她肯定要说雪太厚太大，她不知道该往哪儿走了。现在连朱利安自己也搞不清上山的路怎么走了。
但艾丽就像小狗一样敏锐，有着十足的方向感，无论在深夜还是大雪里，她都能毫不费力地从一个地方抵达另一个地方。
艾丽点了点头：“艾丽知道，大卫也知道。”
她走了几步，但是积雪已经完全覆盖了她的脚踝，她单薄的鞋子很快就会湿透的。
“再这样下去，她的双脚肯定会被冻伤的，”迪克说，“我们把她放到雪橇上，拉着她走吧。很遗憾我们没有合适的雪地靴给她穿。
我说，这次‘远征’真的很疯狂，是不是！希望我们能顺利到达。还好艾丽认识路，我现在真的是晕头转向，根本分不清东西南北！”
“等一下，我口袋里有个指南针。”朱利安说，然后在衣服口袋里一阵搜罗。最后他拿出了一个小小的指南针，看了一眼。
“那是南边，”他用手指着说，“所以那肯定是古塔所在的位置，我们小屋的对面就是南面，因为每天早上太阳会从小屋前面的窗子直射进来。所以我认为我们得走这条路，朝南的路。”
“我们看看艾丽会指哪条路，”迪克一边说，一边把艾丽抱上了雪橇，把她的围巾裹得更紧了，“艾丽，现在我们该走哪条路呢？”
艾丽立刻指向了南方，这让每个人都大吃一惊。
“没错！”朱利安说，“走吧，迪克！我来拉艾丽的雪橇，你可以帮两个女孩拉雪橇。”
大家全都动身出发攀爬剩下的一截斜坡。艾丽和小狗大卫、小羊范尼坐在朱利安的雪橇上，蒂米坐在迪克的雪橇上，女孩们走在后面。蒂米很是享受，他不喜欢一跑四肢就陷到雪里的感受，坐在雪橇上被拉着走要容易、舒服得多。
“大懒虫！”乔治说，蒂米摇了摇尾巴，一点也不在乎！
朱利安边走边看指南针，大家向南走了好一段路。然后艾丽突然开口，指向了右边：
“那边，那边。”
“她现在想让我们往西走，”朱利安说，停了下来，“我不知道她指的路对不对。依我看来，我们现在是径直往古塔去，但是如果我们走了艾丽指的路，会不会走到这座山的右边去。”
“那边，那边。”艾丽蛮横地重复，大卫一个劲儿地叫，好像在说这是对的！
“最好跟着她走，”迪克说，“她看上去十分自信。”
所以朱利安向右拐去，其他人紧随其后。他们爬了一个陡坡，费了好长时间，朱利安累得大口喘着气。
“还有很远吗？”他问艾丽。艾丽此时正在抚摸自己的羔羊，毫不留意前进的方向。周围白茫茫一片，除了地上的积雪和空中的雪花，什么也没有。
艾丽抬起头，然后向更加靠右的方向指了指，用威尔士语说了些什么东西，然后点了点头。
“太好了，我们好像快到她所说的那个大大的洞了，尽管我们还不知道那究竟是什么。”朱利安一边说，一边继续前进。
大约一分钟后，艾丽突然跳下了雪橇，站在原地，皱着眉头观察四周。
“在这里，”她说，“大洞，在这里。”
“好吧，可能没错，但是我想看得更清楚些。”朱利安说。于是，艾丽开始挖雪，蒂米和大卫激动地跑去帮助她，以为她在捕捉兔子或是找隐藏的兔子窝。
“我担心这个孩子给我们指错路了，”迪克说，“这里怎么可能会有一个大大的洞呢？”
蒂米和艾丽已经深挖下去，挖出了一丛石南，这种植物在这片地区漫山遍野都是。朱利安看到那一丛石南郁郁生长，冻得僵硬，但瘦长结实。
“蒂米，你带走蒂米！”艾丽突然对乔治说，“它掉下去，下去，像大卫一样掉下去！”
“不得不说！她肯定是在找一个壶穴！”迪克突然说，“大家听说过吧，就是那些不时出现在沼泽边的奇怪洞穴，这些洞会突然出现在地底下。在某些地方也叫作‘死亡之洞’。我们在科林岛就发现过一个，你们不记得了吗？”
“是的，也位于石南丛生的地方！”乔治想起来了，“并且它通向海边的一个山洞！原来艾丽说的大洞就是这个！沼泽壶穴！蒂米，赶紧回来，你会掉下去的！”
蒂米确实差点就掉洞里了！幸好乔治及时抓住了它的项圈！大卫十分谨慎，毕竟它之前掉进去过一次！
“洞！”艾丽高兴地说，“大大的洞！艾丽找到了！”
“是的，你找到了你的洞，你真的很棒！但是我们要怎么进到古塔里呢？”迪克问道。艾丽没有听懂，她摘下石南和白雪的面纱，这个洞彻底显露出来。她跪在那里，正在往洞里看。
“不得不说，这简直太了不起了，”朱利安说，“一个人只身前来此地，在大雪覆盖着万物，什么也看不见的情况下，她竟然能找到这个洞。她真的跟小狗一样灵敏。小艾丽，好样的！”
艾丽突然开心地笑了，偷偷牵住了朱利安的手。
“下去，对吗？”她说，“艾丽带路？”
“嗯，如果可行的话，我们最好都下去。”朱利安说，尽管他不是很喜欢这个主意。因为洞里一片漆黑，什么也看不见，而且根本不知道洞里有什么东西。
小羊范尼好像等不及了。它跳到这个大洞的边缘，把自己的小脑袋伸了进去，然后两腿一蹬，它就下去了！
“它跳进洞里了！”乔治，一脸惊讶地大喊，“等等，艾丽，你别跳，你会受伤的！”
但是艾丽的身子也滑进了洞口，然后一松手便滑下去了。
“艾丽在这里，”底下传来一阵小小的呼喊，“你们赶快！”
Chapter 18 INSIDE OLD TOWERS
Chapter 18 INSIDE OLD TOWERS
'Well! Did you see that - she just let go and dropped!' said George, amazed. 'I wonder she didn't breakher legs. Julian, shine your torch down.'
Julian shone it down.
'It's a pretty good drop,' he said. 'I think we'll take the ropes off our toboggans and let ourselves downon those. I don't particularly want to break a leg or sprain an ankle just at present.'
'If we pull our toboggans over the hole, and let their ropes hang down into it, they will hold us safely,'
said Dick, and pulled his toboggan right across the hole.
Then Julian pulled the other toboggan across as well, and soon the ropes were dangling down, readyto take each of the four children.
'What about Timmy?' asked George, anxiously. 'Dave has jumped down - though I wonder he didn'tbreak a leg!'
'I'll wrap my coat over him and tie one of the ropes round him,' said Julian. 'Then we can let himdown easily. Come here, Tim.'
Tim was soon tied up in the coat with the rope. Then Dick slithered down on another rope, and stoodon the floor of the hole, ready to take Timmy when Julian let him down. It really wasn't very difficult.
Aily looked rather scornful as the four children used the ropes.
Julian laughed, and patted her shoulder.
'We're not all goat-like, you know,' he said. 'We don't gambol about the mountains all day long, likeyou, Aily. Well - that was your big big hole. What next?'
He shone his torch round. 'Yes - it's a pot-hole. There's a small underground cave here. Look - is thata tunnel leading out of it?'
'Yes,' said George, as Aily and the lamb skipped off together down into the darkness of the tunnel.
'Look at that - no torch, no lamp - and yet she goes off into the darkness without any fear!
I'd be scared stiff!'
78
'She's got eyes like a cat,' said Anne. 'Well, do we follow her? We'd better or we shall lose her!'
'Come on, Timmy,' said George, and all Five went down the dark, winding little tunnel after Aily.
Anne glanced up at the rocky roof and thought with wonder of the thick masses of heather growingon its upper surface, all covered with thick snow.
Aily was nowhere to be seen! Julian grew worried.
'Aily! Come back!'
But there was no answer.
'Never mind,' said Dick. 'There's probably only one way to go, and she knows we must take it! If wecome to a fork, we'll shout again.'
But they didn't come to a fork. The tunnel wound on and on, going steadily downhill. Its roof was ofrock, and so were the walls, but underfoot was sandy soil alternating with rocky ridges that made thegoing rather rough.
Julian looked at his compass.
'We've been going in a north-easterly direction more or less,' he said. 'And that should be in thedirection of Old Towers. I think I know how Aily gets into the house!'
'Yes - this tunnel must pass right under the fence- that- bites, and under the grounds, and endsomewhere near the cellars of the house,' said Dick. 'Or possibly in them. Where's that child?'
They caught sight of her just then, in the light of Julian's torch. She was waiting for them in a cornerof the passage with Dave and Fany.
She pointed upwards.
'Way to garden!' she said. 'Little hole there - big for Aily! Not for you!'
Julian shone his torch upwards. Sure enough there was a small hole there, which appeared to beovergrown with weeds or heather - he couldn't tell what. He looked at the rocky sides of the upwardpassage to the hole, and saw how easily Aily could have climbed up to squeeze out of it, and roamthe gardens! So that was how it was she had been able to pick up the notes that the poor old womanhad constantly thrown out so hopefully! Aily must surely have been the only person who managed toget into the grounds without permission!
'This way,' said Aily, and led them past the garden-hole and downwards again.
'We must be under the house now,' said Julian. 'I wonder if...'
But before he could finish his sentence he saw that the passage had led them into some old, half-ruined cellars. It went through a half-fallen cellar wall, and Aily proudly led them into a dark, 79cluttered-up cellar which, with its many barrels and old bottles, must once have been the wine-cellar.
'What cellars!' exclaimed Dick, in amazement, as they went through one after another. 'Dozens ofthem. Hey - what's this, Aily?'
He had come to where one high wall had been broken down completely - but the breakage seemed tohave been done by human hands, for the breaks looked new, and were not covered with grime andmould as were the other fallen-down walls. A vast opening had been made into what seemed at firstglance to be a low-walled cave.
Then a curious sound came to their ears. The sound of water - water gurgling and splashing!
Julian took a step forward to peer into the cave beyond the broken walls.
But Aily tugged at his hand in terror.
'No, no! Not go there! Bad mans, very bad mans. Bad place there!'
'I say, look!' said Julian, amazed, taking no notice of Aily's tugging hand. 'An underground river- not just a stream - a river! Flowing down through the mountain, probably fed by springs on the way- and I bet it goes right down to the sea somewhere! We know the sea isn't far away!'
'Bad mans down there,' said Aily, in panic, pulling Dick and George too. 'Bang-bang - big fires -big noise. You come in house, quick!'
'Gosh - isn't this extraordinary!' said Julian, quite astounded. 'What is going on here? We really shallhave to find out. What in the world does Aily mean?'
Anne and George were astonished too, but had no desire to go along the river and find out!
'Better leave this for now, and go up into the house,' said George. 'After all, the old lady is theimportant thing at the moment. No wonder they imprisoned her in one of the towers, so that shewouldn't know what is going on!'
'Well, I'm blowed if I know what's going on,' said Dick. 'I'm not quite sure if I'm in some peculiarkind of nightmare or not!'
'You come house,' said Aily again, and this time, to her great relief, they followed her, Timmytrotting at the back with George, not quite knowing what to make of it all.
Aily led them unerringly back through the smashed walls, through the musty cellars, and into somethat looked as if they had recently been used for store-places. Tins of food stood about, old furniture,old tins and baths and cans, barrels of all sizes and shapes.
80
'We go soft!' said Aily, meaning that they were now to walk quietly. They followed her up a longflight of stone cellar steps to a great door that stood half open. Aily stood at the top listening -probably for the tall caretaker, Julian thought. He wondered if the fierce dog was anywhere about thehouse. He whispered to Aily.
'Big dog in house, Aily?'
'No. Big dog in garden, big dog there all day and night,' whispered back the little girl, and Julian feltmost relieved.
'Aily find man,' said Aily, and shot off by herself, motioning to the others to wait.
'She's gone to find out where the caretaker is,' said Julian. 'My word - did you ever know anyone likeher? Gosh, she's back again already!'
So she was, smiling mischievously all over her face.
'Man sleep,' she said. 'Man safe.' She took them through the door from the cellar into a perfectlyenormous kitchen, with a colossal range at one end, black and empty now. A larder door near by wasopen and Aily darted into it. She brought out a meat pie and offered it to Julian. He shook his head atonce.
'No. You mustn't steal!' he said. But Aily either didn't understand, or didn't want to, for she bit intothe pie herself, gobbling great pieces down, and then put it on the floor for the animals to finish,which they were very pleased to do!
'Aily - take us to the old woman,' said Dick, not wanting to waste time on things like this. 'Aily -you are sure there is no one else in the house?'
'Aily know!' said the little girl. 'One man to watch - he in there!' and she pointed towards the door ofa nearby room. 'He watch old woman, and dog watch garden. Other mans not come in here.'
'Oh - well, where do they live then, these strange 'other men'?' asked Julian, but Aily didn'tunderstand. She led them to a great hall, from which two wide stairways swept up, meeting above atan even wider landing.
The lamb gambolled up, and the little dog Dave barked joyfully.
'Sh!' said all the four children at once, but Aily laughed. She seemed quite at home in the house andDick wondered how many times she had let herself down into the pot-hole and come wandering inhere. No wonder she spent so many nights away from home - she could always come and hide awayin some corner of this big house! They followed her up the wide stairs.
81
But Aily would come no farther than the second floor. She had brought them up two flights of stairs -and now before them stretched a great picture gallery, that led to another stairway at the far end. Thechild hung back and refused to take Julian's hand.
'What's the matter?' he asked.
'Aily not come here,' said the child, shrinking back. 'Not go here, not ever. Those peoples see Aily!'
And she pointed at the rows of great pictures, each a portrait of some long-dead owner of the house.
'She's afraid of the portraits!' said Anne. 'Afraid of all their eyes following her as she runs down thelong gallery! Funny little thing. All right - you stay here, Aily. We'll go on up to the towers.'
They left Aily curled up behind a curtain, with Dave and Fany. Anne glanced at the rows of graveportraits as the four of them, with Timmy, walked softly down the long gallery. She shivered a little,for their eyes seemed to follow her as she passed, looking grave and disapproving.
Up another flight of stairs, and yet another. And now they were in a long passage that ran from tower-room to tower-room. Which was the tower they wanted?
It was very easy to find out! All of them had their doors wide open but one!
'This must be it!' said Julian, and knocked at the door.
'Who knocks?' said a weak, sorrowful voice. 'Surely not you, Matthew - you have no manners!
Unlock the door and do not mock me with your knocking!'
'The key's in the door,' said Dick. 'Unlock it, Julian - quick!'
18.古塔之行
古塔之行
“天啊，你们看见了没，她刚刚直接跳下去了！”乔治一脸惊讶地说，“她有没有摔到啊。朱利安快打开你的手电筒照一照。”
朱利安打开了手电筒。“这个洞还挺深的呢，”他说，“我想最好还是从雪橇上把绳子取下来，然后抓着绳子下去，我可不想现在就摔断腿或扭伤脚踝。”
“我们把雪橇放在洞口，放下绳子，这样我们就能安全下去了。”迪克一边说，一边把他的雪橇拉到了洞口。
朱利安也把另一个雪橇拉了过来，很快他们把绳子放下去，孩子们也做好了准备。
“蒂米怎么办？”乔治焦急地问，“大卫跳下去了，但是我很担心它有没有摔伤！”
“我会用我的外套包住它，然后用绳子的一头拴住它，”朱利安说，“这样我们就能安全快速地把它放下去了。蒂米，到我这儿来。”
蒂米很快就被裹在大衣里了，朱利安用绳子把蒂米缠了起来。
迪克从另一根绳子上先滑了下去，站在洞里，等着朱利安放下蒂米好去接应。这好像没有想象中那么困难，见到四个孩子还得用绳子，艾丽用鄙视的眼光盯着他们。
朱利安笑了笑，拍了拍她的肩膀。“我们可不是个个都强壮如牛的，”他说，“我们也不像你，整日在山中闯荡。好了，这就是你的大大的洞，接下来怎么走？”
朱利安用手电筒照了一圈。“是的，这就是一个壶穴，这里有一个小地下洞穴。你们看，那延伸出去的是一条隧道吗？”
“是的，”乔治说，这时艾丽和小羊一起跳进了隧道里，消失在黑暗中，“你看她们，没有手电筒，没有煤油灯，但她毫不畏惧，一往无前！如果是我，我会吓得不敢动弹！”
“她好像长了一双猫的眼睛，”安妮说，“我们要跟着她吗？最好快点，否则要跟丢了。”
“蒂米，快来！”乔治说。然后，五个小伙伴紧追艾丽的步伐，沿着这条黑暗又崎岖的隧道前进。安妮盯着头顶的岩石，想着岩石层表面竟然长着浓密的石南等植物，现在又被大雪覆盖，到处白茫茫一片。
走了好一阵，也没追上艾丽，朱利安越来越担心。
“艾丽！快回来！”
但是无人应答。
“没事的，”迪克说，“或许只有一条路，她知道我们只能走这条路。如果走到交叉路口，我们再喊她一次。”
但他们没有遇到交叉路口，隧道弯弯曲曲，一直不断地往山下延伸。它的顶部和墙壁都是坚硬的岩石，但是底部是沙子路混合着些小石子，使得这条路特别粗糙磨脚。
朱利安看了看指南针。
“我们差不多在向东北方向走，”他说，“这个方向应该通向古塔。我想我知道艾丽是怎么进入到这座房子的了！”
“是的，这条隧道必定从那条‘吃人’栅栏下穿过，然后直达房子的地窖附近，”迪克说，“也有可能直接通到地窖里。不过，艾丽现在在哪儿呢？”
话音刚落，他们就借助朱利安的手电筒光看到了艾丽。她站在通道的角落，和大卫、范尼一起等着他们。
艾丽伸手往上指了指。“去花园的路！”她说，“那里洞很小，只有艾丽能钻过去，你们过不去！”
朱利安抬头用手电筒照了照。那里确实有一个小小的洞口，但很显然上方杂草丛生，被野草或是石南丛遮住了。他看了看两侧墙壁，岩石突兀，可见小艾丽可以轻易爬上去然后钻出洞口，在花园里漫步闲逛！所以这也是为何老太太扔下的纸条能被艾丽捡到！艾丽肯定是唯一一位未经允许就擅自进入的人！
“这边。”艾丽一边说，一边带着他们离开这个花园洞口，往更深处走去了。
“我们现在肯定在房子下面，”朱利安说，“我想知道……”
但是话还没说完，他就看见这条路把他们引到了一个老旧、残破的地窖里。经过一个墙体已经倒塌多半的地窖时，艾丽骄傲地把大家带了进去。里面黑暗潮湿，肮脏凌乱，遍地都是木桶和旧瓶，这里以前肯定是个酒窖。
“地窖！”路经一个又一个地窖，迪克惊呼道，“好几十个。喂，艾丽，这是什么？”
他来到了一个墙体完全破坏的酒窖前，但那破损似乎是人为所致，那地方看上去像是刚被破坏不久，因为它不像其他那些倒塌的墙体一样，已经被尘土和污泥所覆盖。乍一看，这个巨大的断裂墙体，会让人误以为里面是个小型洞穴。
紧接着，传来一阵奇怪的声音。是水的声音：流水潺潺，四处迸溅！朱利安向前迈了一步，试图从墙体断开处往洞穴里看。
艾丽紧紧攥着他的手，十分恐惧。
“不要！不要！不要去那里！坏人，非常非常坏！那是个危险地方！”
“你们看！”朱利安兴奋地说，并没有注意艾丽正拽着他的手，“地下河！这不是一条小溪，是一条河！在山的内部飞驰流淌，或许是一路上的山泉水汇集而成，而且我猜它肯定直接注入了大海！因为海边就在不远处！”
“坏人在那里，”艾丽惊慌地说，也拽着迪克和乔治，“‘砰砰’，大火，噪音。你们快过来，快！”
“天啊，太不可思议了！”朱利安吃惊地说，“这是怎么回事？我们一定要弄清楚。艾丽刚刚说的到底是什么意思？”
安妮和乔治也十分惊讶，但并不打算要沿着河流走去查探真相！
“我们最好现在就走，赶紧进到房子里，”乔治说，“毕竟救出老太太才是最重要的事。难怪他们把她囚禁在塔里，这样她就不知道自己周围发生的一切了！”
“如果是我，知道了真相后，我肯定会崩溃的，”迪克说，“我现在都搞不清自己是不是做了一场噩梦！”
“你们快回来。”艾丽又强调了一遍。不过好在这次他们都跟上来了。蒂米跟在乔治后面一路小跑，完全摸不着头脑。
艾丽一路带着他们准确地穿过粉碎的墙壁，发霉的地窖，还路过了一些看似近期被用来储物的地方。那些地方，满地都是食品罐头，旧家具，旧罐头，旧浴盆，还有各种形状大小不一的桶。
“我们轻走！”艾丽说，意思是他们现在要悄悄地走。小伙伴们跟在艾丽后面，走了一段地窖里很长的石梯。石梯顶端的门半掩着，艾丽站在上面，小心翼翼地听着。朱利安认为她或许是在观察那个高高大大的看门人，他还想知道那只恶狗是否在房子里，于是低声问艾丽：“艾丽，那只大狗在房子里吗？”
“没有。大狗在花园里，大狗一整天都在那里。”小女孩小声回应道，这让朱利安放心不少！
“艾丽出去看看有没有人。”艾丽对大家说完，眨眼的工夫便溜了出去，并示意其他人等一等。
“她去检查看门人在不在附近了，”朱利安说，“我的天啊，你们见过像她一样勇敢的人吗？老天，她这么快又回来了！”
艾丽确实初生牛犊不怕虎，脸上绽开顽皮的笑容。
“人睡了，人安全。”艾丽带着他们离开地窖，进入到一间超大的厨房里，空间容量巨大，但是空空如也、一片萧条。附近一个储物室的门开着，艾丽飞速冲了进去，拿了一块肉饼出来，递给朱利安。朱利安立刻摇了摇头。
“不可以，不能偷东西！”他说。但是艾丽也没听懂，或许不想懂，自己把那块饼吃了，顺便还咬了一大块下来，放到地板上，和小羊小狗分享，见到美食，它们总是乐此不疲。
“艾丽，带我们去找老太太，”迪克说，他不想把时间浪费在这些事情上面，“艾丽，你确定没人在这个房子里吗？”
“艾丽知道！”小女孩说，“有一个人看守，他在这里！”她指向附近一个房间的门，“他看管老太太，狗看守花园，其他人不来这里。”
“好的，那么那些奇怪的‘其他人’住在哪里呢？”朱利安问，但是艾丽没有听懂。她带着他们到了一个富丽堂皇的大厅，大厅里竖起两个华丽气派的楼梯，盘旋向上，连接楼上的一个大平台。
小羊欢呼雀跃起来，小狗大卫也兴奋地直叫。
“嘘！”四个小伙伴立刻比了个手势，但是艾丽依旧不管不顾地欢笑着。在这个房子里，她好像特别无忧无虑。迪克心想，她自己一个人，钻进壶穴，一路摸索，肯定来过这里很多次了！难怪她总会离家出走，毕竟她总能在这个大房子里随便找个地方落脚！他们跟在她身后上了楼梯。
但是艾丽走到二楼就不想往上走了。艾丽已经带他们上了两层楼，现在他们站在一个开阔的画廊前，画廊的尽头，是另一个楼梯。艾丽退后几步，拒绝去牵朱利安伸出的手。
“怎么了？”朱利安问道。
“艾丽没来过这里，”小女孩一边说，一边往后缩，“不去那里，从不。那些人看着艾丽！”然后她指了指那一排图画，每一张图片上的人都曾是这个房子的主人，而他们早已过世。
“她害怕这些肖像画！”安妮说，“害怕这画里人物的眼睛会盯着她看！这有趣的小家伙。好吧，艾丽，那你待在这儿，哪儿也别去。我们去楼上看看。”
他们把艾丽、大卫和范尼安顿在窗帘后面，四个小伙伴和蒂米就轻轻地在画廊里穿行。路过的时候，安妮瞥了一眼这些肖像画，把她吓得一激灵，画上人物的眼睛都盯着她，看上去满是忧伤和失望。
孩子们上了一个又一个楼梯，现在到了一个长通道里，这一层楼全是房间，一个挨着一个。但哪一间才是他们想要的呢？
其实很容易就能找到！所有房间的门都开着，但除了一间！
“一定就是它了！”朱利安一边说，一边敲门。
“是谁？”房间里传来一个微弱痛苦的声音，“肯定不是你，马修。你从来不讲文明！自己开门，不要再敲门来戏弄我了！”
“钥匙就在门上，”迪克说，“打开它。朱利安，快！”
Chapter 19 A LOT OF EXCITEMENT
Chapter 19 A LOT OF EXCITEMENT
Julian turned the key in the lock and opened the door. A stately old woman sat in a chair beside thewindow, reading a book. She did not turn round.
'And why have you come at this time of the morning, Matthew?' she said, without turning round.
'And how did you find the manners to knock? Are you remembering the time when you knew how tobehave to your elders and betters?'
'It isn't Matthew,' said Julian. 'It's us - we've come to set you free.'
82
The old woman turned at once, gaping in amazement. She got up and went over to the door, and theFive saw that she was trembling.
'Who are you? Let me out of that door before Matthew comes! Let me out, I tell you!'
She pushed by the four children and the dog, and then stood uncertainly in the passage.
'What shall I do? Where shall I go? Are those men here still?'
She went back into her room and sank down in her chair again, covering her face with her hands.
'I feel faint. Get me some water.'
Anne sprang to pour out a glass of water from a jug on a table. The old woman took it and drank it.
She looked at Anne.
'Who are you? What is the meaning of this? Where is Matthew? Oh, I must be going mad!'
'Mrs. Thomas - you are Mrs. Thomas, aren't you?' said Julian. 'Little Aily, the shepherd's daughter,brought us here. She knew you were locked up. You remember her mother, don't you?
She told us she used to come and wait on you.'
'Aily's mother - Maggy - yes, yes. But what has Aily to do with this? I don't believe it. It's anothertrick. Where are the men who killed my son?'
Julian looked at Dick. It was clear that the poor old lady was not herself - or else this suddenappearance of the children had upset her.
'Those men that my Llewellyn brought here - they wanted to buy my house,' she said. 'But I wouldn'tsell it, no, I wouldn't. Do you know what they said to me? They said that in this hill, far, far belowmy house, was a rare metal - a powerful metal - worth a fortune. What did they call it now?'
She looked at the children, as if expecting them to know. She shook her head as they didn't answer.
'Why should you know about it - you are only children. But I wouldn't sell it - no, I wouldn't sell myhouse - nor the metal below. Do you know what they wanted it for? For bombs to kill people with!
And I said NO, never will I sell this place so that men can dig the metal and make bombs.
It is against the law of God, I said, and I, Bronwen Thomas, will not do such a thing!'
The children listened in awe. The old lady seemed beside herself, and rocked to and fro as she spoke.
'So they asked my son, and he said no, as I had. But they took him away and killed him - and nowthey are at work below. Yes, yes, I hear them - I hear the noises creeping up, I feel my 83house shake, I see strange things. But who are you? And where is Matthew? He keeps me here,locked in my room. He told me about Llewellyn, my poor dead son; he is a wicked man, Matthew, heworks with those men, those evil men!'
She seemed to forget the four children for a little while. They wondered what to do. Julian saw thatthe poor woman was not fit to take down the stairs with them, and through the tunnel - and certainlyshe could not get out of the pot-hole. He began to wish that he hadn't been so hasty in his ideas ofrescue. It would really be best to lock the door again and leave her here in safety until he could getthe police - for certainly now the police must come.
'We will leave you now,' he said, 'and send someone soon to bring you out of here. We are sorry wedisturbed you.'
And, to the astonishment of the others, he pushed them out of the room, turned the key in the lockagain, and put it into his pocket!
'Aren't we going to take her with us?' said George, surprised. 'Poor, poor old thing!'
'No. How can we?' said Julian, troubled. 'We must go to the police, no matter what Morgan says.
I see it all now, don't you? The mother forbidding the son to sell the old place, in spite of theenormous amount of money offered - the son refusing too - and the men making a plot to get insomehow and down to this metal, whatever it is - and work it...'
'And killing the son?' said Dick. 'Well, it may be so - but I should have thought that was a prettydrastic thing to do! Surely the son would have been reported missing very quickly, and the policewould have made enquiries. Nobody said the son was missing or dead, did they, except the old lady?'
'Well, let's not talk about it now,' said Julian. 'We've got to do something. I'm sorry to leave old Mrs.
Thomas still locked up in that room, but I honestly think she would be safer there than anywhereelse.'
They went down the two flights of stairs to the picture gallery. Aily was there, still cuddling her twopets. She was pleased to see them, and ran up smiling. She didn't seem to notice that they hadn't theold woman with them.
'Man down there very cross!' she said, and laughed. 'He wake now - he shout and bang!'
'Goodness - I hope he won't see us,' said Julian. 'We've got to get out of here, quick, and go to thepolice. Let's hope he won't come rushing at us, or call in that fierce dog.'
84
They went downstairs at top speed, looking out for Matthew. But there was no sign of him in person -though there was a most tremendous row going on somewhere, of shouting and banging.
'Aily lock door,' said Aily, suddenly, pointing in the direction of the sounds. 'Man lock old woman -Aily lock man!'
'Did you? Did you really lock him in?' said Julian, delighted. 'You really are a monkey - but what agood idea! I wish I'd thought of it!'
He went to the door of the room in which the angry Matthew was.
'Matthew!' he called sternly. There was a dead silence, and then Matthew's astonished voice camethrough the shut door.
'Who's that? Who locked me in? If it's one of you men, you'll be sorry for it! Silly joke to play on me,when you know I've got to go up and see to old Mrs. Thomas!'
'Matthew - this isn't one of the men,' said Julian, and how the others admired his cool, determinedvoice! 'We have come to rescue Mrs. Thomas from that tower - and now we are going to the police toreport all this, and to report too that her son has been killed by the men who are working far belowthis house.'
There was an astonished silence. Then Matthew's voice came again.
'What's all this? I don't understand! The police can't do anything. Mr. Llewellyn, the son, isn't dead -my word, no, he's all alive and kicking - and he won't be very pleased with you, whoever you are.
Clear off at once - but let me out before you go. I'm surprised that Alsatian outside didn't get you, thatI am!'
It was the children's turn to be amazed now. So the son wasn't dead! Then where was he? And whyhad Matthew told old Mrs. Thomas such a cruel untruth? Julian asked him at once.
'Why did you tell Mrs. Thomas her son was dead then?'
'What's it to do with you? Mr. Llewellyn, he told me to tell his mother that. The old lady wouldn't lethim sell that stuff deep down under the house - the stuff that gets hold of cars and bicycles, andploughs, and makes them heavy as lead. Magnetises them, so they say. Well, if he wants to sell it,why shouldn't he? But what I say is this - he shouldn't sell it to foreigners, no, that he shouldn't! If I'dhave known that - well - I wouldn't have taken money from him to act like I did!'
The voice rose and fell as Matthew told his extraordinary tale. Then the man banged frantically onthe door again.
85
'Who are you? You let me out! I've been kind to the old lady - you ask her - though she's difficult, andstrange in her ways. I've been loyal to Mr. Llewellyn, though he's not easy, no, that he's not. Who areyou, I say? Let me out; let me out! If Mr. Llewellyn catches me locked in here, he'll kill me! He'll sayI've let his secret out. He'll say... LET ME OUT, I say!'
'He sounds a bit mad,' said Julian, thankful that the man was locked up. 'He must be a bit simple too,to believe all that the son told him, and do everything he was told to do. Well - we'd better go to thepolice. Come on - we'll go back the way we came.'
'Let's just have a look down that river to see what the men are up to,' said Dick. 'Just you and I,Julian. It's such a chance - we needn't be seen, and it would only take a few minutes. The girls couldwait somewhere with Tim.'
'I don't think we ought to stop now,' said Julian, 'I really don't.'
'No, don't let's,' said Anne. 'I don't like this house. It's got a horrid 'feel' about it. And I can't imaginewhat the 'shuddering' would be like, when the men start their work again deep down below -whatever it is!'
'Well, come along then,' said Julian, and, completely ignoring Matthew's yells and bangs, the childrenmade their way through the kitchen and down the cellar-steps, flashing on their torches to light theirway.
'I bet Matthew is wild that we've left him locked up,' said Dick, as they went through the vast cellars.
'Serves him right! Taking bribes from the son - and telling lies to that poor old woman.
Hallo, we've come to where the men smashed the walls here, to get along the river tunnel. I supposethey found that was the easiest way to go down to where the precious metal was -whatever it is!'
They stood looking through the smashed walls at the gurgling river.
'Come, come,' said Aily, dragging at Julian's hand. 'Bad mans there!'
She was holding Dave, her little dog, in case he fell into the rushing river, but Fany the lamb wasgambolling loose as usual. And, quite suddenly, she skipped off down the river tunnel, her tailwhisking behind her madly.
'Fany, Fany!' cried Aily. 'Fany bach!'
But the lamb, thinking that she was going the right way, gambolled on, deafened by the rushing ofthe water. Aily ran after her, as sure-footed as the lamb, hopping and skipping over the rough rockybank of the river.
86
'Come back, you little ass!' yelled Julian. But Aily either did not or would not hear, and shedisappeared into the blackness of the tunnel almost at once.
'She hasn't got a torch, Ju - she'll fall in and drown!' yelled George, in a panic. 'Timmy, go after her,Fetch her back!'
And away went Timmy obediently, running as fast as he could beside the black, churning water,hurrying on its way downwards to the sea.
Julian and the others waited anxiously. Aily didn't come back, nor did any of the animals - andGeorge began to be very panicky about Timmy.
'Oh, Julian - what's happened to Tim - and the others?' she said. 'They've no torches - oh, why did Ilet Timmy go? We all ought to have gone!'
'They'll come back all right,' said Julian, much more confidently than he felt. 'That child Aily can seein the dark, I really do believe - and she knows her way about like a dog.'
But when, after five minutes, not one of the four had come back, George started forward, flashing hertorch on the rocky path beside the river.
'I'm going to find Timmy,' she said. 'And nobody's going to stop me!'
And she was gone before the boys could get hold of her! Julian gave a shout of aggravation.
'George! Don't be an ass! Timmy will find his own way back. Don't go down there - you don't knowwhat you may find!'
'Come on,' said Dick, starting off down the river too. 'George won't come back, we know that -not unless she finds Tim and the others. We'd better go quickly before anything awful happens!'
Anne had to follow the boys, her heart beating fast. What a thing to happen! Just the very worstpossible!
19.扣人心弦的冒险
扣人心弦的冒险
朱利安扭动钥匙，打开房门，里面坐着一位仪态端庄的老太太，她端坐在窗户旁边的椅子上，正在看书。房门开了，但她并没有转过身来。
“马修，你为什么早上这个时候过来？”她问道，仍然没有回头，“你又是从哪儿想起来的这些敲门的礼仪？你还记得你刚学会如何礼貌对待你的长辈和雇主的时候吗？”
“不是马修，”朱利安说，“是我们，我们是来救您的。”
老太太触电似的回过头来，目瞪口呆。她立刻站起身，朝门口走来，全身都在颤抖。
“你们是谁？在马修来之前，快让我离开这儿！听见没，让我走！”
她用力推开了四个孩子和狗，然后迷茫地站在走廊里，不知所措。
“我该怎么做？我该去哪里？这些人还在不在这里？”
她返回自己的房间，又坐回到椅子上，掩面痛哭。
“我感到头晕，给我一些水。”
安妮赶紧从桌子上的水壶里倒了一杯水给她。老太太接过水喝了下去，看了看安妮：
“你们是谁？这是什么情况？马修在哪儿？天啊，我肯定是疯了！”
“托马斯太太，您是托马斯太太，对吗？”朱利安说，“小艾丽，那位牧羊人的女儿，是她带我们来这儿的，她知道您被关起来了。
您还记得她妈妈吗？她告诉我们她以前常常来这儿照顾您。”
“艾丽的妈妈，玛姬，是的，我还记得。但是这件事和艾丽有什么牵扯？我才不信，你们休想糊弄我。杀了我儿子的那些人在哪儿？”
朱利安看着迪克。他们心里都明白这个可怜的老太太已经失去了理智，要不然的话就是孩子们突然造访，让她心烦意乱。
“是卢埃林带他们过来的，他们要买我的房子，”她说，“但我不会卖的，绝不！你知道他们怎么说吗？他们说在这座山里，我的房子底下很深的地方，有稀有的金属矿，一种强大的金属，价值连城。他们现在把这种金属叫作什么来着？”
她看着孩子们，好像很期待他们告诉自己答案。但看到孩子们一头雾水，她摇了摇头。
“你们怎么可能会知道，你们只是孩子。但是我不会卖掉，不会的，我不会卖掉我的房子，也不会卖掉房子底下埋藏的金属矿。你们知道他们要用这金属矿来干什么吗？他们要用来做炸弹，杀人！
所以我坚决不许，我是绝对不会卖了这个地方，让那些人挖矿制作炸弹的！这违背了上帝的本意，我，布朗温•托马斯，决不会做这样的事情！”
孩子们听着，敬意油然而生。老太太好像缓过神来了，变得清醒很多，说话的时候一前一后地晃着，振振有词。
“所以他们去问我的儿子，他跟我一样坚决说不。但是他们把他带走然后杀了他，现在他们在我的房子底下开工了。是的，没错，我可以听见一阵阵的噪音，我感觉到我的房子在震动，我看见奇怪的东西。但是你们是谁？马修在哪里？他把我关在这里，锁在我自己的房间里。他告诉我卢埃林的遭遇，我那可怜的儿子。马修是个坏蛋，他同那些恶人为伍，狼狈为奸！”
她似乎忘了房间里还有四个孩子，自说自话了好一阵。孩子们在想接下来怎么办。朱利安看到这位可怜的老太太行动不便，不能跟他们一起下楼原路返回，要穿过隧道，从壶穴钻出去更是不可能了。他开始后悔要是当初没有这么心急如焚就好了。他现在想到的最好的办法就是重新锁上门，让她安全地待在房间里，这样他们就能赶紧去找警察来。而这个时候，警察一定会相信他们的话。
“我们现在要走了，”他说，“我们去找人来救您，很抱歉打扰了您。”
这让其他小伙伴都很惊讶，朱利安把大家推出房间，再次锁上门，把钥匙放进了口袋。
“我们不带她一起走吗？”乔治惊讶地问，“可怜的老太太！真可怜！”
“不行，怎么带？”朱利安说，心情烦躁不安，“不管摩根说什么，我们都必须找警察来。我们可是亲眼所见，证据确凿！尽管有万贯金钱的诱惑，这位母亲还是禁止儿子出售此地，而且儿子也照做了。但是这些人想方设法潜入进来，下到地底开采金属矿，无论是什么金属矿，反正他们一心只想着发大财……”
“而且还杀了她儿子？”迪克说，“应该是真的吧，这实在太过分了，泯灭人性！可以确定的是，他很快便被报道失踪了，警察做了调查取证。但除了老太太，没有人说她儿子失踪或死亡，对吗？”
“好了，现在不讨论这个了，”朱利安说，“我们必须做点什么。
很抱歉还把托马斯老太太关在那个房间里，但实话实说，最危险的地方就是最安全的地方。”
他们下了两层楼，到了画廊，艾丽还在那儿等着，和她的两只小宠物依偎在一起。看见他们回来了，笑着跑过去迎接他们，似乎没有注意到那个老太太并没有和他们同行。
“下面的男人很生气！”她笑着说，“现在他醒了，又喊又叫，乱砸东西！”
“天啊，希望我们不要被发现，”朱利安说，“我们现在必须赶紧离开这里去报警。但愿他不会朝我们冲过来，或者叫来那只恶狗。”
他们以最快的速度往楼下走，一边提防着马修。尽管连他的人影都没见着，房子里还是回荡着他怒气冲冲的喊叫，以及乱摔乱砸的声音。
“艾丽锁了门，”艾丽突然对着声音的源头，指了指，“他锁了老太太，艾丽锁了他！”
“你干的？你真的把他锁起来了？”朱利安高兴地说，“你真是只调皮的小猴子，好主意！我都没想到！”
朱利安去了愤怒的马修所在的房间。
“马修！”朱利安严厉地喊道。接着是死亡般的沉默，随后马修惊人的大嗓门从紧闭的门里穿透而出。
“是谁？谁把我锁在里面？如果是你们中的一个，肯定会后悔的！竟然敢拿我开玩笑，你们明明知道我得上楼去看管托马斯老太！”
“马修，这里不止一个人，”朱利安用冷静、坚定的嗓音说道，“我们是来救托马斯太太逃离这座古塔的，现在我们要去报警，交待这一切，并且如实向警察说明在这座房子底下工作的人杀了她的儿子。”
接着是死一般的沉寂，过了一会儿后，马修又开口了。
“你在说什么？我听不懂！警察对我们根本束手无策。卢埃林先生，她儿子，根本没死。他还活得好好的，生龙活虎。无论你们是谁，他都不会乐意看到你们的。你们立刻滚蛋！快放我出去！门外的阿尔萨斯狗竟然没有咬你，等我出去你们就没这么幸运了！”
现在轮到孩子们吃惊了。所以老太太的儿子没有死！那么他在哪里呢？为什么马修要告诉托马斯太太如此残酷的谎言？于是朱利安立刻问他：“你为什么告诉托马斯太太她的儿子死了？”
“这和你有什么关系？这是卢埃林先生吩咐我这么做的。老太太坚决不让他卖掉房子底下的东西，那些东西能牵制住小汽车、自行车、耕犁，让它们跟灌了铅一样重。他们说，地底下的东西有磁性。所以，如果他想卖，又有何不可呢？但我不得不说，他不应该卖给外国人！不应该啊！如果早点知道的话，我才不会领了他的钱，替他做这些龌龊的勾当。”
讲述这个惊人的故事时，马修的嗓音忽大忽小。然后，这个男人又一次疯狂地砸门。
“你们是谁？快放我出去！我对老太太一直很好，你们可以问她，尽管她现在过得很痛苦，举止异样。我一直忠于卢埃林先生，他也不容易，不，他是不容易。你们究竟是谁？放我出去！放我出去！如果卢埃林先生发现我被锁在这里，他会杀了我的！他一定会说我泄露了他的秘密，他会说……快放我出去！”
“这一切听上去有点疯狂，”朱利安说，幸好这个男的被锁起来了，“他应该也是很单纯的，听信了那个儿子说的话，甘愿为他做任何事情。好了，我们最好赶紧去报警。走吧，我们原路返回。”
“我们看一眼那条河，看看那些人在那里做什么，”迪克说，“就你和我两个人。这个机会很难得，我们不会被发现，而且只需要花几分钟时间。女孩们和蒂米去其他地方等着我们。”
“我觉得我们现在不该停下来，”朱利安说，“真的不能停。”
“是的，赶紧走吧，”安妮说，“我不喜欢这座房子，总感觉阴森森的，很恐怖。而且我简直不敢想象，当地底下的人开始工作的时候，整个房子跟着一起震动是什么感受！”
“我们赶紧走吧。”朱利安说道，完全忽略了马修的呼喊和乱砸。孩子们穿过厨房，进入地窖口，打开手电筒照明。
“我们扔下马修，对他置之不理，他肯定气得发疯，”大家穿过一个空旷地窖的时候，迪克说，“真是老天有眼，罪有应得！从儿子那儿收受贿赂，对那位可怜的老母亲撒谎！看，我们已经走到这堵粉碎的墙了，能看见河道。我想他们肯定发现这是挖掘金属最简单的途径。”
他们站在那里，透过墙的裂口看着那条潺潺流淌的河。
“别走了，别走了，”艾丽一边说，一边拽了拽朱利安的手，“那里有坏人！”
她抓着小狗大卫，以防它掉进湍急的河里，但是小羊范尼还是像往常一样欢脱自在。突然，它步子一迈，蹬进了河道里，只看见它的尾巴疯狂地摇着。
“范尼！范尼！”艾丽大喊，“范尼！范尼！”
但是小羊以为自己走对了路，欢脱地被冲往下游。水流声太大，它根本没听到艾丽的呼喊。艾丽赶紧追上去，像小羊一样矫健，跳起来避开崎岖的岩石路，一头扎进了河里。
“快回来，你这个小傻瓜！”朱利安大喊。但是艾丽也听不见，转眼间她便消失在河道无尽的黑暗中。
“朱利安，她没有手电筒，她会掉进去淹死的！”乔治立刻大喊，惊慌不已，“蒂米，快去追上她，把她带回来！”
蒂米乖乖地去了，它在湍急黑暗的河水里尽可能快地朝下游追赶去。
朱利安和其他小伙伴焦急地等着。艾丽没有回来，也没有任何动物回来，乔治开始非常担心蒂米。
“天啊，朱利安，蒂米不会有什么事吧？艾丽和范尼怎么样了？”她说，“她们没有手电筒！天啊，我为什么要让蒂米去！我们本来都已经走出好远了！”
“她们马上就会回来的，”朱利安说，语气透出他自己都难以相信的坚定，“我相信艾丽能在黑暗中看清东西，她像小狗一样，对自己有十足的了解和把握。”
但是，五分钟过去了，没有一个身影回来，乔治往前走了走，用手电筒往岩石岸边照了照。
“我要去找蒂米，”她说，“你们谁也劝不了我！”
在男孩们反应过来要抓住她时，她已经走了！朱利安非常生气，朝她大喊：
“乔治！你也是傻瓜吗！蒂米自己会回来的。你别去，你根本不知道会碰到什么！”
“走吧，”迪克也开始沿着河岸走下去，“我们都知道，乔治不会回头的，除非她找到了蒂米和小伙伴们。我们要抓紧了，否则后果不堪设想！”
安妮不得不跟着男孩们，她的心跳很快。简直世事难料，糟糕至极！
Chapter 20 IN THE HEART OF THE HILL
Chapter 20 IN THE HEART OF THE HILL
It seemed like a bad dream to the four children, making their way over the rocky edge of theunderground river. Their torches had good batteries, fortunately, and gave a bright light, so that theycould see their way alongside the river. But at times this rocky 'path' they had to walk on grew verynarrow indeed!
87
'Oh dear!' thought Anne, trying to keep up with the boys, 'I know I shall slip! I wish I hadn't theseheavy snow-boots on. What a noise the river makes, booming along, and how fast it goes!'
Some way in front of the two boys and Anne was George, still calling for Timmy. She was veryworried because he didn't come back to her, as he always did when she called him. She didn't realisethat Timmy couldn't hear her! The river made such a noise in the enclosed rocky tunnel that Timmyheard nothing at all but the sound of the churning waters!
Quite suddenly the tunnel widened tremendously - the river making a big, broad pool before it toreon down the tunnel again. The walls opened out into an enormous cave, half of which was water andthe other half a stretch of rough, rocky floor. George was most astonished. But she was even moreastonished at other things she saw!
Two rafts, sturdy and immensely strong, were moored at the side of the deep pool! And on the floorof the cave were what looked like tin barrels, standing in rough rows - presumably waiting to bepacked on to the rafts.
At one side of the cave were stacked great heaps of tins and bottles and cans, none of them opened -and on the other side an equally vast heap of discarded ones - all opened and thrown to one side. Bigwooden crates stood about too - though George could not imagine what they were for.
The cave was dimly lighted by electricity of some kind - probably from a battery fixed upsomewhere. Nobody seemed to be about at all! George gave a call, hoping that Timmy wassomewhere there.
'Timmy! Where are you?'
And at once Timmy came from behind one of the big crates, his tail wagging hard! George was soglad that she fell on one knee and hugged him tight.
'You naughty dog,' she said, fondling him. 'Why didn't you come when you were called? Did you findthe others? Where is Aily?'
A small face peeped from behind the crate near by, the one from which Timmy had appeared. It wasAily. She looked terrified, and tears were on her cheeks. She clasped her lamb to her, and Dave wasat her heels. She ran straight across to George, crying out something in Welsh, pointing back up thetunnel. George nodded.
'Yes. We'll go back straightaway! Look - here come the others!'
88
Aily had already seen them. She ran to Julian with a cry of delight, and he swung her up in his arms,lamb and all. He was very glad to see George and Timmy too.
They all had a good look round the strange cave.
'I see what the idea is,' said Julian. 'Jolly clever too! They are mining that precious metal down heresomewhere - and putting it on those rafts there, so that the underground river can take it right down tothe sea. I bet they've got barges or something waiting down at some secret creek, to take the stuffaway at night!'
'Whew!' said Dick. 'Very ingenious! And they count on the queer noises and shudderings and thingsto frighten people and keep them away from this hill - nobody dares to come prying round to seewhat's up!'
'The nearest farm is Magga Glen Farm, where the Jones's live,' said Julian. 'They would really be theonly people who could find out anything definite.'
'Which they obviously did!' said Dick. 'I bet Morgan knows all about this, and is in with the son whosold the precious metal to the men who came after it - though it was his mother's.'
'There's no queer noise or anything down here - no noise at all except the sound of the river,' saidJulian. 'Do you suppose the works aren't going just now?'
'Well,' began Dick, and then suddenly stopped as Dave and Timmy began to growl, Timmy in a deepvoice and Dave in a smaller one. Julian at once pulled Aily and George behind a big crate, and Dickpushed Anne there. They listened intently. What had the dogs heard? Was there time to rush back tothe tunnel and make their way out before they were seen?
Timmy went on growling in a low voice. The children's hearts began to beat fast - and then theyheard voices. Where did they come from? Dick peeped cautiously round the crate. It was in a darkcorner and he hoped he could not be seen.
The voices seemed to come from the direction of the great pool, and Dick looked over to it. He gavea sudden exclamation.
'Ju! Look over there! Do you see what I see?'
Julian looked - and was filled with astonishment. Two men had come up the tunnel, from the sea- evidently walking on the rocky edge of the river, just as they themselves had done - and were nowwading in the shallows of the pool.
89
'One is MORGAN!' whispered Julian. 'And who's the other man! Gosh - it's the shepherd - Aily'sfather! Would you believe it? Well - we always thought Morgan was mixed up in this - but I didn'tthink the shepherd was.'
Aily had seen both Morgan and her father. She made no move to go to the shepherd - she was far tooscared of Morgan!
Morgan and the shepherd stood and gazed round a little, as if looking for someone. Then, keeping tothe shadows, they made their way across the great cave right to the back of it, where another tunnel,very wide, led downwards into the hill.
As they went, a strange noise began.
'The rumbling!' whispered George, and Timmy growled again. 'But oh - doesn't it sound near.
What a terrific noise - it's got right inside my head!'
It was no use whispering now! They had to shout if they wanted to say anything. And then theshuddering began! Everything shuddered and vibrated, and when the children touched one another,they could feel the vibration in the other's hands and arms.
'It's as if we're being run by electricity ourselves!' said Dick, astonished. 'I wonder if it's anything todo with that strange metal that is under this hill - that makes steel things heavy, so that ploughs won'tplough, and spades won't dig!'
'Let's follow Morgan and the shepherd,' said Julian, so excited now that he felt he must seeeverything possible. 'We can keep well in the shadows. Nobody would ever guess we were here!'
'Aily - you stay here,' said Julian. 'Big noise, big big noise frighten Fany and Dave.'
Aily nodded. She settled down behind the crate with her pets.
'Aily wait,' she said. She had no desire at all to go any nearer that strange noise! In her simple mindshe imagined that possibly the thunder itself came from this hill and was made here. Yes, perhaps thelightning too!
Morgan and the shepherd had now disappeared into the tunnel right at the back of the cave, on theopposite side to the great pool. The Five went quickly over to it and looked down. It was very wideand very steep - but rough steps had been cut in it, so that it was not difficult to go down.
They trod warily down the steep tunnel, astonished because it was dimly lighted - and yet there wereno lamps of any sort to be seen.
'I think it's the reflection of some great glare far below,' shouted Julian, above the rumbling. Thenoise was so loud that it was almost like walking in the middle of thunder.
90
Down and down they went, and the tunnel curved and wound about, always steep, rocky and dimlylit. Suddenly the noise grew louder, and the tunnel grew lighter. The children saw the end of it, theexit outlined in brilliant light - a light that shimmered and shook in a most curious way.
'We're coming to the works - the mine - where that strange metal is!' shouted Dick, so excited that hefelt his hands trembling. 'Be careful we aren't seen. JU! BE CAREFUL WE AREN'TSEEN!'
They went cautiously to the end of the tunnel and peered out. They were looking into a vast pit oflight, round which men stood, working some curious-looking machines. The children could not makeout what they were - and, indeed, the light was so blinding that it was only possible to look with theireyelids almost closed. All the men were wearing face-guards.
Suddenly the loud rumbling stopped and the light disappeared as if someone had turned off anelectric switch! Then, in the darkness, a glow formed, a strange glow that came upwards andoutwards, and seemed to go right through the roof itself! Dick clutched at Julian.
'That's the kind of glow we saw the other night!' he said. 'My word - it begins down here, goes rightup through the hill in some strange way, and hangs above it! That shimmering must come from heretoo - some kind of rays that can go through anything - like X-rays or something!'
'It's like a dream,' said Anne, feeling George to make sure it wasn't! 'Just like a dream!'
'Where are Morgan and the shepherd?' said Dick. 'Look - there they are - in that corner, not far off.
Look out - they're coming back!'
The four children moved back quickly into the tunnel, afraid of being seen. They suddenly heardshouts, and stumbled up the rocky steps even faster. Had they been seen? It sounded like it!
'I can hear someone coming up the tunnel behind us!' panted Dick. 'Quick, quick! I wish that noisewould begin again. I know we can be heard!'
Someone was climbing swiftly up behind them. There were shouts and yells from below too. Itsounded as if all the men were disturbed and angry. Why, oh why had they followed Morgan and theshepherd? They could so easily have gone back to the cellars!
They came to the top of the steep rocky tunnel at last, and ran to hide behind the crates, hoping to slipinto the river-tunnel without being seen. They had to get Aily before they fled! Where was she?
'Aily, Aily!' shouted Julian. 'Where's she gone? We daren't leave her here. AILY!'
It was difficult to remember exactly where they had left her, in this great cave.
91
'There's the lamb!' cried Julian, thankfully, as he saw it on the other side of a crate. 'AILY!'
'Look out! There's Morgan!' shouted George, as the big farmer came out of the tunnel and ran acrossthe cave. He saw the children and stopped in the utmost amazement.
'What are you doing here?' he roared. 'Come with us, quickly! You're in danger!'
The shepherd now appeared too, and Aily ran from behind her crate to him. He stared as if he couldnot believe his eyes, and then picked her up, calling something to Morgan in Welsh.
Morgan swung round on Julian again.
'I told you not to interfere!' he roared. 'I was handling this! Now we shall all be caught! Fool of a boy!
Quick - we must hide and hope that the men will think we've gone down the tunnel. If we try toescape now, they will overtake us, and bring us back!'
He swept the astonished children into a dark corner and pulled crates round them.
'Stay there!' he said. 'We will do what we can!'
20.山之心
山之心
对四个孩子来说，沿着崎岖不平的地下河岸行走，简直就是场噩梦。不过好在他们的手电筒电力充裕，亮度十足，所以他们能看见地下河岸边的路。但是，他们走的这条岩石路不时会变得非常狭窄！
“天啊！”安妮一边想，一边努力跟上男孩们，“我感觉我要滑倒了！要是没穿雪地靴就好了！这个河的动静太大了吧，轰隆不断，水流湍急！”
乔治就走在他们三个前面不远处，嘴里仍在唤着蒂米。但是蒂米并没有如往常一样，听到呼唤就回来，这让乔治愈发担心。她并没有意识到蒂米根本听不见她的呼喊！河水在封闭的岩石隧道里来回冲击碰撞，发出巨大的噪音，除了水花不断的搅动声，蒂米什么也听不见！
突然之间，隧道一下子大大拓宽了。河水在进入下一节隧道之前，在此处汇集形成了一个宽阔的水池。墙壁向内凿出了一个大洞，其中一半是水，一半是崎岖的岩石层。乔治非常吃惊。但更让她吃惊的，是眼前所见的东西！
两个木筏，看上去十分坚硬牢固，停泊在这个深水池边。在这个洞的地面，放着成排的锡桶，大概是等着要放到木筏上的。
山洞的另一边堆放着许多未开封的锡罐、瓶子和食品罐，另一边则堆砌着几乎同等数目的废弃罐头。此外，四周还摆放了些大的木制板条箱。乔治根本想象不到它们是用来干什么的。
不知哪里隐约透出些微弱的光，或许是安置在某处的电灯，把整个山洞都照得微亮。但是周围似乎空无一人！乔治叫了一声：“蒂米，你在哪里？”
突然，蒂米从一个大板条箱后面窜了出来，它一个劲儿地摇着尾巴。乔治高兴地跪在地上，紧紧抱住了它。
“你这调皮的狗，”她一边说，一边疼爱地抚摸，“我叫你的时候，你怎么不回来呢？你找到其他小伙伴了吗？艾丽在哪里？”
一张小脸从附近的一个板条箱后面露了出来，就是蒂米藏身的那个板条箱。是艾丽！她看上去真的吓坏了，泪珠还挂在脸颊上。
她紧紧抱着小羊，大卫就在她脚边。她径直朝乔治跑去，一边哇哇大哭，一边说着些威尔士语，还用手指了指隧道上游。乔治点了点头：
“是的，我们马上就回去！看，他们也来了！”
艾丽早就看见他们了，她高兴地朝朱利安跑去，喜极而泣。朱利安一把抱住了艾丽和她的小羊小狗。看见乔治和蒂米，他一下子就放心了。
所有人都对这个奇怪的山洞审视了一番。
“我知道突破口了！”朱利安说，“我怎么这么聪明！他们正在地底下开采珍贵金属矿，然后把矿物放到这些竹筏上，这样就能顺着这条地下河直达尽头的大海。我敢打赌他们肯定在某些秘密的溪流处放置了驳船或者其他运输工具，好在夜里运走这些东西。”
“老天！”迪克说，“太聪明了！然后他们制造着奇怪的噪音和震动，来吓唬村民，让他们自动远离这座山。这样就没人敢来打听缘由了！”
“最近的农场是玛嘉格林农场，琼斯一家人就生活在那儿，”朱利安说，“他们是唯一一群可能知道某些事实的人了。”
“他们显然知道！”迪克说，“我敢打赌摩根全都知道，而且还和老太太的儿子合伙把贵金属卖给了不良商人，而这些都是属于老太太的。”
“这里除了流水声，再没有任何奇怪的噪音或动静，”朱利安说，“难道是因为他们刚才没有工作？”
“是吗……”迪克正准备说话，结果被蒂米和大卫突如其来的低吼给打断了。蒂米声音低沉，大卫更小声。朱利安立刻把艾丽和乔治拉到一个大板条箱后，迪克拉着安妮也藏好了。他们留心听着。
狗狗们到底听见什么了？在被发现之前，他们能否顺利返回隧道，成功脱身呢？
蒂米继续低吼着，孩子们精神紧绷，心跳加速。然后，他们听到了什么动静，可声音是从哪里传来的呢？迪克探出眼睛，小心翼翼地观察四周。他待在一个黑暗的角落里，只能祈祷自己不要轻易被发现。
声音似乎是来自大水池，迪克朝那边看了一眼，他突然惊呼了一声：“朱利安！快看那里！你看到了吗？”
朱利安看了一眼，同样惊讶不已。两个男人正从下游朝河道上游走来，很显然他们和孩子们一样，也是一路沿着崎岖的河岸走来的。现在，他们正涉水走在水池的浅滩边。
“有一个是摩根！”朱利安小声说，“另一个人是谁？天啊，是牧羊人，是艾丽的爸爸！这是真的吗？天啊，我们早知道摩根参与其中，但是我真没想到牧羊人也……”
艾丽也看见了摩根还有自己的爸爸。她根本不敢朝爸爸走去，因为她实在太怕摩根了！
摩根和牧羊人站着凝视了一小会儿，好像在找人。然后，继续前行，横穿过这个大山洞，消失在黑暗里，径直朝山洞后方的另一条隧道走去，那条隧道非常宽阔，通往山下。
他们一走，便传来了奇怪的噪音。
“轰隆声！”乔治小声说，蒂米再次低吼起来，“但是，它听上去就在不远处。这个噪音太可怕了，就像是从我头顶上传来的！”
现在小声说话一点用都没有！孩子们如果想说话，必须要大声吼。然后，震动又开始了！一切都开始颤抖、震动起来，孩子们一旦碰到彼此，就能感受到彼此手上、臂膀上的震动。
“这就好像我们被安装上了引擎一样！”迪克惊喜地说，“我想知道这和山下的那些奇怪金属有没有关系。因为这些金属会让铁和钢更重，所以犁不能耕地，锹不能挖地！”
“我们跟着摩根和牧羊人，”朱利安说，非常兴奋，总觉得要亲眼所见，一探究竟，“我们可以躲在黑暗里，这样就没人能猜到我们在这里了！”
“艾丽，你留在这儿吧，”朱利安说，“大噪音，很大很大的噪音，会吓坏范尼和大卫。”
艾丽点点头，和她的小伙伴们藏在板条箱后面坐了下来。
“艾丽，等着。”她说。她没有任何想法要去接近那个奇怪的噪音。在她简单的头脑中，她以为那大概是山里传来的雷电，就是从这里产生的。对，或许天上的闪光也是从这里产生的！
摩根和牧羊人现在已经消失在了山洞的正后方，进入了大水池的对面。五个小伙伴赶紧追了上去，低头往下看了看。这条隧道非常宽阔，但也非常陡峭。好在有突出的台阶，这样也就不是特别难走。
他们小心翼翼地沿着这条陡峭的隧道前行，让人惊讶的是，尽管没有任何电灯之类的东西，但河道里居然影影绰绰，闪着些微光。
“这一定是底下某些闪光之物在墙上反射的光。”为了盖过轰隆声，朱利安只能大叫。周围的噪音实在太大了，这感觉就好像在雷声中行走似的。
他们一直往下走啊走，隧道里弯弯曲曲，回转盘旋，陡峭不已，崎岖不平，但总亮着一种微弱的光。突然，噪音变得更大了，隧道里也变得更亮了。孩子们终于走到头了，终点处正闪耀着万丈光芒，这是一种以某种奇特方式而闪闪发亮的光，微微震动的光。
“我们终于找到了核心关键——矿坑——这种神奇金属的所在地！”迪克大喊说，他激动地感觉到自己手心都在颤抖，“小心一点，我们不要暴露自己。朱利安！多加小心！我们不能暴露！”
他们小心翼翼地靠近隧道底，往里看了看。一群人围在那里，正在一个巨大的闪着光的矿坑里作业，周围摆了一些奇怪的机器，孩子们也不知道那些机器是什么。实际上，光亮太强，照得大家只能眯起眼睛观察，而所有作业的人都带了面罩。
突然，吵闹的隆隆声停止了，光也突然消失了，就好像有人拔掉了电源插头。随后，在黑暗中，形成了一束光，它升了起来，不断向上向外飞去，就好像要冲破岩顶！迪克抓紧了朱利安：
“那就是我们前几天看到的光束！”他说，“天哪！原来它来源于这儿。以某种奇怪的方式上升，穿破山林，悬在高空！那些光束也一定来源于这儿，就像X光之类的，能穿破任何东西的光束！”
“这跟做梦一样，”安妮说，紧紧抓着乔治，以保证这不是梦，“像个梦一样！”
“摩根和牧羊人在哪里？”迪克说，“瞧，他们在那儿，就在不远处。小心，他们往回走了！”
由于担心被发现，四个孩子赶紧退回隧道里。突然，他们听见了叫喊声，尽管步履蹒跚，后面的声音似乎也加快了回程的步伐。
他们被发现了吗？听起来好像是的！
“我感觉到有人追来了，就在我们后面！”迪克大喘着说，“快，快！希望那个噪音又能响起来，不然我们肯定会被发现的！”
在他们的身后，有人飞快地攀登上来。底下也传来叫喊声。听上去所有人都感到不安，十分愤怒，为什么，他们为什么要追摩根和牧羊人呢？他们俩本可以轻而易举回到地窖的！
孩子们终于爬完了陡峭的岩石隧道，一出洞口，他们就跑去藏到板条箱后面去了，默默祈祷溜进河道的时候没有被发现。在逃走之前，必须找到艾丽！她在哪儿呢？
“艾丽，艾丽！”朱利安大喊，“她去哪儿了？我们不该单独留她在这儿的，艾丽！”
这个山洞太大了，很难确切地回忆起来她躲在哪儿。
“小羊在这儿！”朱利安大叫，谢天谢地，于是他又看了一眼板条箱的另一侧，“艾丽！”
“小心！摩根来了！”乔治大喊，正在这时，这个大块头农夫正从隧道里探出身，跑向山洞。他看到了孩子们，惊讶地停下了。
“你们在这里做什么？”他怒吼，“跟我们一起走，快点！你们很危险！”
牧羊人也出来了，艾丽从板条箱后面出来，向他跑去。牧羊人见到这一幕，怔住了，难以相信眼前看到的一切。很快，他抱起艾丽，用威尔士语对摩根说了些话。
摩根转身对着朱利安，怒吼道：
“我警告过你不要再干涉此事！我会处理的！现在，我们可能都会被抓！愚蠢！快点，我们必须藏起来，但愿这些人以为我们已经沿着隧道走了吧。如果现在逃跑的话，他们肯定会追上我们，把我们抓回来！”
他把受惊的孩子们安置到一个漆黑的角落里，用板条箱把大家围起来。
“待在这儿别动！”他说，“我们一定竭尽全力！”
Chapter 21 AN ASTOUNDING THING
Chapter 21 AN ASTOUNDING THING
The five children crouched behind the pile of crates. Morgan pushed another crate up, so that theywere completely hidden. Dick clutched Julian.
'Julian! We've made fools of ourselves! Morgan was trying to find out the secret of Old Towershimself - with the help of the shepherd! They were about the only people in the neighbourhood whocould guess what was going on. The shepherd could see all the strange things we saw, whilewatching his sheep on the mountainside - and he told Morgan...'
Julian groaned.
'Yes. No wonder he was angry when he thought we were meddling in such a serious matter. Nowonder he forbade us to do anything more! Gosh - we've been idiots! Where is Morgan now?
Can you see him?'
'No. He's hiding somewhere. Listen - here come the men!' said Dick. 'There's a crack between twocrates here - I can see the first man. He's got an iron bar or something. He looks pretty grim!'
The men came out cautiously, evidently not sure how many people they were after. They advancedacross the cave, seven of them, all with weapons of some kind. Two went to the upper 92river tunnel, two went to the one that led down to the sea, and the others began to hunt among thecrates.
They found the children first! It was Aily's fault, poor child. She gave a sudden scream of fright -and in a trice the men had pulled away the crates. Crash - one by one they fell to the ground - and theamazed men found themselves looking at five children! But not for long! With a terrifying barkTimmy flung himself on the first man!
He yelled and began to fight him off, but Timmy held on like grim death. Morgan appeared from theshadows and surprised another of the men, jumping on him and getting him on the ground, at thesame time catching hold of a second man and tossing him away. He had the strength of a giant!
'Run!' he yelled to the children, but they couldn't. Two of the men had penned them into a corner, andalthough Julian leapt at one of them, he was simply thrown back again. These men were strongminers, and though not a match for the giant like Morgan, they could certainly take everyone elseprisoner - including the gentle shepherd! He too was penned into a corner - only Morgan and Timmywere fighting now.
'Timmy will be hurt!' said George, in a trembling voice, and she tried to push one of the men away toget to him. 'Oh look, Ju - that man is trying to hit him with that bar!'
Timmy dodged the bar and sprang at the man, who turned and ran for his life. Timmy shot after himand got him on the ground. But there were too many men - and more were now coming up from thetunnel at the back of the cave, pouring in, with weapons of all kinds. All of them were amazed to seethe five children!
The men seemed mostly to be foreigners, and spoke a language the children couldn't understand.
But one man was not a foreigner - he was obviously the boss, and gave his orders as if he expectedthem to be obeyed. He hadn't joined in the fight at all.
The shepherd was soon overpowered, and his hands bound behind his back. Morgan fought off forsome time - but then had to surrender. He was like an angry bull, stamping here, pulling there,roaring with rage as three men tried to tie his hands.
The boss came up and faced him.
'You will be sorry for this, Morgan,' he said. 'All our lives we have been enemies - you down at thefarm - and I here at Old Towers.'
Morgan suddenly spat at him.
93
'Where is your old mother?' he shouted. 'A prisoner in her own house! Who has robbed her?
You, Llewellyn Thomas!' Then he went off into a spate of Welsh, his voice rising high as hedenounced the man in front of him.
Julian admired the fearless Morgan enormously, as he stood with his hands bound, defying the manwho had been a life- long enemy. How many quarrels had these two had, living in the samecountryside, trying their strength against one another? Julian wished intensely that he had obeyedMorgan's command and left everything to him. But he had thought Morgan was on the side of theenemy! How stupid he had been!
'It's all because of us that he's caught,' thought the boy, remorsefully. 'I've been a fool - and I thoughtI was doing something clever - and right! And now we're all landed in this mess - the girls too! Whatwill they do with us? I suppose the only safe thing for them to do is to keep us prisoner till they'vefinished this mining job, collected a fortune from the metal, whatever it is, and gone.'
Llewellyn Thomas was now giving some sharp orders, and the men were listening. Timmy wasgrowling, held by the collar in a stranglehold by one of the men. If he tried to squirm away, the mantwisted his hand in the collar a little more and poor Timmy was half-choked.
George was wild with despair. Julian had to keep stopping her from trying to make a dash to Timmy.
He was afraid that these rough men would strike her, though she was a girl. Aily sat in a corner,hugging her lamb and Dave, who had been far too scared even to take a little nip at any of the men!
Morgan was held by two hefty miners - but, quite suddenly, he hurled himself sideways at one ofthem and sent him flying - and then at the other, who staggered away and fell over a tin.
With a great roar Morgan stumbled to the pool, and waded to the entrance of the tunnel that led to thesea, his hands still tightly tied behind his back.
'The fool!' said Llewellyn Thomas. 'If he thinks he can get along that tunnel with his hands tied, he ismad! He will fall into that rushing river - and without his hands to help him, he will drown!
No - don't go after him. Let him go - let him drown! We shall be well rid of him!'
The shepherd struggled to his feet to go after his master, knowing quite well that Llewellyn was right- no man could get along that rough edge to the river without his hands to steady him, feeling alongthe wall at the side - and one slip would put him into the churning, hurrying river, that ran at full-peltdown to the sea far below, at the bottom of the hill.
94
But Morgan did not mean to escape. He was not going to struggle along beside that treacheroustorrent! He had come all the way up beside it, with the shepherd, and knew how easy it was to slip,on the wet rocky edge. No - Morgan had another plan!
Julian watched him disappear into the tunnel, and his heart sank. He too knew that no one could walkalong there without free hands to help him. But what could anyone do?
The boss turned to the other men, who were still staring after Morgan. He was just about to saysomething to them, when a roar came to their ears.
Not the roar of the torrent in the underground tunnel. Not the roar of the strange rumbling mine.
No - the roar of a giant voice, that crashed out of the tunnel, and echoed round the cave.
It was Morgan's enormous voice. Morgan, calling the names of his seven great dogs! The childrenlistened in amazement at this unbelievable voice.
'DAI! BOB! TANG! COME TO ME! DOON! JOLL! RAFE! HAL!'
The names echoed round and round the cave, and it seemed as if the place was full of giant voices.
Aily, who was used to hearing the dogs called, didn't turn a hair - but the others crouched back inamazement at the sound of such a voice. Surely no one in all the world had ever shouted so loudlybefore!
'DAI! DAI! RAFE! RAFE!'
The great voice boomed again and again, seeming to be louder each time. At first Llewellyn Thomas,the boss, was taken aback - but then he laughed sneeringly.
'Does he think he can get his dogs up from the beach?' he said. 'All that way down the tunnel.
He's mad! Let him be!'
Then again the great voice roared out the names of the seven dogs belonging to Morgan and theshepherd.
'DAI! BOB! TANG! DOON! JOLL! RAFE! HAL!'
At the last name, Morgan's voice seemed to crack. The shepherd raised his head in dismay.
Morgan had over-strained that great voice of his, and no wonder. No megaphone could possibly havebeen louder!
There was silence after that. Morgan called no more. Neither did he appear again. The children feltscared and depressed, and Aily began to whimper.
The curious shuddering vibration began to creep into everything again, and the boss turned sharply,giving some more orders. Two of the men ran to the tunnel at the back of the cave and 95disappeared. Then things took on a curious shimmer, as if a heat-haze had spread everywhere, and itbegan to feel very warm in the cave.
Suddenly something happened. At first it sounded far-off in the distance, a confused noise that madeTimmy tug at his collar again and prick his ears. He barked, and the man who was holding him hithim.
'What's that noise?' said Llewellyn Thomas, sharply, looking all round. There was no telling where itcame from. But it grew louder - and louder - and then suddenly Julian knew what it was!
It was the loud barking of seven angry dogs! The shepherd knew it too, and a glad smile came overhis face. He glanced at Llewellyn to see if he recognised it as well.
Yes - the boss had certainly recognised that dreadful sound now. He could hardly believe it!
Surely it was not possible that Morgan's voice, enormous as it was, had echoed all the way down thetunnel, and been heard by the sharp, pricked-up ears of the dogs who loved him?
But so it was! Dai, the oldest dog, who loved his master more than any of them, had stood tense andlistening ever since Morgan and the shepherd had left them. And, from somewhere far distant,echoing down to the end of the tunnel they were guarding, Dai had heard the faint echoes of hismaster's beloved voice!
His bark had told the other dogs the news - and, led by Dai, they had all rushed up the rocky tunnel,sure-footed on the slippery, rocky path beside the racing river.
They came to Morgan, sitting beside the river, not far from the big cave, a little way down the tunnel.
It was a moment of joy for Morgan and his dogs!
Dai soon snuffled at his hands and bit the ropes in half. Morgan was free!
'Down now - and hush!' commanded Morgan. He began to walk steadily back to the cave, thenmotioned the dogs before him.
'Attack!' he cried in Welsh.
And then, to the men's horror, the seven dogs raced out of the tunnel at a great speed, barking,growling, snarling - with a triumphant Morgan behind them, so tall that he had to bend double toleave the tunnel.
The men fled, every one of them. Llewellyn had turned to run even before the dogs appeared, andwas gone. Dai leapt at one man and got him down, and Tang leapt at another. The cave was filledwith snarls and growls and excited barking.
96
Timmy delightedly joined in, for his captor had rushed away too. Even little Dave ran to join thiswonderful fight, while the children stood amazed and thankful to see their enemy defeated!
'Who would have thought of this?' said Dick, sending the crates crashing down. 'What an astoundingthing! Hurrah for Morgan and his seven dogs!'
21.绝处逢生
绝处逢生
五个孩子蹲在成堆的板条箱后面。摩根在上方又堆了一个箱子，这样孩子们便完全隐藏起来。迪克紧紧抓着朱利安：
“朱利安！我们大错特错了！摩根正和牧羊人一起，试图找出古塔的秘密！他们是这附近唯一能知道事情发展动向的人。牧羊人住在山上看管羊群的时候，肯定看见了所有奇怪的现象，然后告诉了摩根……”
朱利安难过懊悔起来：
“对！难怪他看到我们时，很生气我们插手这么严重的事情。难怪他禁止我们再有任何行动！天啊，我们都是傻子！摩根现在在哪儿？你们能看见他吗？”
“不能。他肯定藏在某个地方了。注意，那些人来了！”迪克说，“这两个板条箱之间有一条缝，我看见第一个人出来了。他手里拿着铁棍之类的东西，看起来非常生气！”
这些人出来了，很明显他们也不确定要面对多少人，十分小心谨慎。他们穿过山洞，一共有七个人，手里都拿着武器。两个去了河道上游，两个去了下游，剩下三个开始在板条箱里面搜查。
最先被他们发现的是孩子们。都是艾丽的错，这可怜的孩子。
她突然发出了一声害怕的尖叫，那些人瞬间就把板条箱拉开了，发现了孩子们。大家都被吓了一跳，一个接着一个被按倒在地上。搜查的人看到五个孩子，十分惊讶！但是很快，蒂米便恶狠狠地叫着扑向了第一个人！
那个人大叫着，开始反抗，试图把蒂米从身上甩下来。但是蒂米死死咬住他不放。这时候，摩根从黑暗里走出来了，这让那些人吓了一大跳。摩根起身一跃，就把第二个人打倒在地，同时一手抓起了第三个，把他扔了出去。他简直就是大力士！
“快跑！”他朝孩子们大喊，但是他们逃不了。两个人把他们围困在一个角落里，动弹不得。尽管朱利安试图扑倒一个，但是很快就被扔回来了。这些人是强壮的矿工，尽管比不上巨人摩根，但足以抓住在场的其他任何人，包括牧羊人在内！他也被困到了一个角落，现在只有蒂米和摩根还在战斗。
“蒂米会受伤的！”乔治说话的声音都在颤抖，她试图推开这些人去把蒂米带回来，“天啊，朱利安，你看，那个人正用铁棍打蒂米！”
蒂米巧妙地避开了铁棍，勇敢地扑向那个人，那人见状调头便跑。蒂米追了上去，把他扑倒在地。但是这会儿人太多了，越来越多，陆陆续续从山洞后面的隧道里涌现出来，手里拿着各种各样的武器。当他们看到五个孩子的时候，都十分惊讶！
这些人看上去多是外国人，说着孩子们听不懂的语言。但是其中有一个不是，很明显他是老板，他站在一旁完全没有参与打斗，而且在不断地下达命令。
牧羊人很快便被制伏了，他的手被反绑在背后。摩根坚持了一段时间，但最后也不得不投降了。他就像一头愤怒的公牛，顶顶这里，撞撞那里，时而仰天怒吼，三个男人上去才试图绑住他的手。
那个老板走了过来，站在他面前。
“摩根，你会为此付出代价的，”他说，“你住在山下的农场，而我在山上的古塔。我们一直都水火不容，是敌人。”
摩根突然朝他吐口水。“你的老母亲在哪儿？”他大喊，“她成了自己房子的囚犯！是谁劫持了她？是你！卢埃林•托马斯！”然后，他说了一长串的威尔士语，声音巨大，震耳欲聋，简直跟刚才的怒吼不相上下。
摩根站在那里，双手被缚，却依然一身正气，无所畏惧，唾弃面前这个一直以来的仇人，这让朱利安肃然起敬！生活在一个村子里，这两个人到底有过多少次争吵，才闹得如今针锋相对的地步？
但是朱利安他们曾经竟然还误以为摩根是敌人的帮凶！多么愚蠢的想法！
“都是因为我们，他们才被抓的，”朱利安心里非常懊悔，“我就是个傻瓜，我还一度自以为是！现在好了吧，弄得一团糟，还把女孩们牵扯进来！他们现在会拿我们怎么办？我想他们为了安全起见，肯定会关押我们直到他们完成挖矿工程，用矿产换成财富，也毫不考虑这些矿产是何物，有何用途。”
卢埃林•托马斯此时下达了一些刻薄的命令，那些人只能乖乖听着。蒂米被一个男人拎着，痛苦地咆哮着。如果蒂米试图挣脱，这个男人就会狠狠掐住它的脖子，让它喘不过气来。
乔治非常绝望，几乎要发狂了。朱利安不得不拦住她，免得她一冲动，朝蒂米冲过去。朱利安担心，尽管她是个女孩，这些粗鲁的男人也会打她。艾丽坐在角落里，抱着小羊和小狗，小狗蜷成一团，害怕得根本不敢上前去咬任何人。
摩根被两个强壮的矿工看守着。但是，十分突然，他朝其中一个人冲了过去，把他顶飞了，然后冲向另一个人，那人摇摇晃晃走了几步，倒在一个锡罐上。
摩根一声怒吼，朝水池奋力奔去。一路跌跌撞撞，但还是成功涉水到了通向大海的那条河道入口处，但是他的双手仍然被紧紧绑在身后。
“蠢材！”卢埃林•托马斯说，“如果他认为被绑着双手还能活着走出这条河道，简直就是做梦！他会掉进湍急的河水里，慢慢沉下去，然后淹死！别去了，不用去追他，让他走吧，反正他也活不了！我们反倒少了一桩事！”
牧羊人挣扎着前去阻拦自己的雇主，心里十分清楚，卢埃林说得没错，如果没有双手平衡身体，很难通过这条崎岖陡峭的河岸，一个不小心就会滑进翻滚湍急的河流，河流一泻而下，直冲到山脚下的大海。
但是摩根并无意要逃跑，他并不想在危险的湍流旁边苦苦挣扎。他和牧羊人一路攀爬上来，陡峭岩岸的路有多滑、多难走，他完全心知肚明。摩根另有计划！
朱利安眼见摩根消失在隧道里，心如死灰。他也知道，没有双手的辅助，是不可能在岸边自如行走的。但是他又能做什么呢？
老板转向其他人，他们还在盯着摩根消失的那头。他正准备对他们发号命令，突然传来一阵咆哮。
不是地下河道水流的冲击声，不是机器运作的隆隆声，都不是，这巨大的怒吼穿透隧道，在洞里回响良久。
是摩根巨大的嗓音！摩根，正在呼唤他的七只狗！听到这震耳欲聋的声音，孩子们简直惊呆了！
“戴！鲍勃！唐！来我这里！都恩！乔尔！拉菲！哈尔！”
这些名字回荡在山洞里，久久不息，就好像这个山洞正在发出巨大的声音。艾丽过去常常听到摩根呼唤这些狗，所以并没有大惊小怪。但是其他人听到这样的声音，都吓得蹲在地上。毫无疑问，要说这是目前世界上最大的嗓音也不为过！
“戴！戴！拉菲！拉菲！”
宏大的声音一遍又一遍地轰炸而来，好像一次比一次大。起初，老板卢埃林被吓了一跳，后退了好几步，但随后他轻蔑地笑了起来。
“他以为这样就能把海滩边的狗叫过来？”他说，“在那样崎岖陡峭的河道上？简直就是疯了，别管他！”
随后，山洞里又响起了摩根七只狗的名字。
“戴！鲍勃！唐！都恩！乔尔！拉菲！哈尔！”
说完最后一个名字，摩根的声音似乎有些疲惫。牧羊人惊愕地抬起头来，摩根嗓子用力过度，已经有点嘶哑了。任何扩音器也没有他的嗓门大！
在那之后，便是一阵沉寂。摩根没有再叫喊了，他也没有再出现。孩子们感到十分害怕和绝望，艾丽开始呜咽起来。
突然，奇怪的震动在周围又蔓延开来，老板迅速转过身，又下达了一些命令。两个人赶紧返回山洞背后的隧道里，消失不见了。
接下来是一团奇怪的微光，就好像一阵热雾，充斥着山洞，周围开始升温。
突然，发生了一些奇怪的事。起初，从很远的地方传来一阵让人混乱的噪音，这让蒂米竖起了耳朵，它身体开始挣脱。蒂米大叫着，身后的男人抓着它，恶狠狠地敲打它。
“那是什么声音？”卢埃林•托马斯警觉地问，一边环顾四周。没有人知道这声音从哪里传来，但这声音越来越大，越来越大。啊哈，朱利安一下子想到了这是什么声音！
是那七只愤怒忠犬的叫声！牧羊人也明白了过来，脸上露出了高兴的笑容。他瞥了一眼卢埃林，看看他有没有听出来。
是的，这位老板也听出来这可怕的声音是什么了。他简直不敢相信！当然，尽管摩根的声音再大，在山洞里再怎么回响，怎么可能沿着河道一路向下，怎么可能传到河道口随时待命的七只忠犬耳朵里的呢？
但事实就是如此！戴，这只最年长的狗，最在乎主人的安危。
摩根和牧羊人走后，它站在隧道口，警觉地听着。接着，从隧道某个方向传来一阵阵回响，站岗的戴也就听到了心爱主人传来的微弱呼唤！
它叫喊着，告诉其他狗狗这个消息。然后，戴带领着大家，冲入了陡峭的隧道，在汹涌湍急、潮湿光滑的河岸边步履坚定，勇往直前。
它们最终来到摩根身边，此时，摩根正坐在距离山洞不远的一处河边。摩根和他的狗，此时相见甚欢。
戴嗅了嗅摩根的手，然后咬断了绑在手上的绳子。摩根自由了！
“安静下来，嘘！”摩根命令道。他开始朝山洞走去，然后示意狗狗们走到前面去。“攻击！”他用威尔士语大喊道。
随后，让敌人们惊慌的是，七只忠犬从河道里快速冲了出来，狂吠着、咆哮着、怒吼着。胜利者摩根走在后面，他太高了，不得不弯下腰来才能走出河道。
这些人见状一个个都落荒而逃。卢埃林在狗狗们出现之前，早就开溜了。戴纵身一跃扑倒一个坏蛋，唐也扑倒一个。山洞里充斥着咆哮、尖叫，还有兴奋的狗叫声。
蒂米摆脱了敌人的束缚，也加入到了战斗中。即使是小大卫，也参与到这场精彩的打斗中。孩子们站在那里，一脸惊愕，看到敌人一个个被击倒，很是欣慰！
“谁会想到这些呢？”迪克一边说，一边推倒挡在前面的板条箱，“这简直让人大开眼界啊！为摩根和他的七只狗欢呼！”
Chapter 22 ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL!
Chapter 22 ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL!
Morgan would not let the children stay underground any longer.
'We have things to do,' he said, in his deep voice, which sounded rather hoarse now. 'You will goback to the farm and telephone to the police for me. You will say 'Morgan has won' and tell them tosend a boat to the little creek I have already told them of. There I will bring these men all the waydown the tunnel to the sea. Go now, at once. Obey me this time, boy.'
'Yes, sir,' said Julian. This man was a hero! And he had thought him a villain! He was ready to obeyhis smallest command now. Then a thought struck him, and he turned back.
'The old woman,' he said. 'Mrs. Thomas - that man's mother. What about her? And we've locked thecaretaker up in his room!'
'You will not do anything but go to the farm and telephone,' said Morgan, sternly. 'I will doeverything there is to be done. Take Aily with you to the farm. She must not be here. Now go.'
And Julian went! He and the others took one last look round at the men, all pinioned by the dogs,lying still and panic-stricken. Then, with Aily and her lamb and dog, he led the others up the tunnelagain, and at last back into the cellars.
'I don't like leaving that old lady up there, in the tower,' said Dick.
'No. But obviously Morgan has his plans,' said Julian, who was not going to disobey orders in anyway this time. 'I expect he has arranged something with the police. We can't interfere now.
We messed things up a bit, I'm afraid.'
They climbed soberly up to the place where they had left their toboggans. It took them some time,and they were beginning to feel very hungry. But Julian wouldn't let them stop even to eat somesandwiches.
97
'No,' he said. 'I've to telephone to the police as soon as ever I can. No stopping now! We'll munch oursandwiches on the way down to the farm.'
It wasn't very difficult to get out of the pot-hole, for they had left the ropes dangling down. Julian andDick helped the two girls up by pushing them, and they in turn helped to pull up the boys from thetop of the hole.
Aily scrambled up easily, swinging delightedly on a rope, and then flinging herself out of the hole.
The lamb leapt up in a miraculous manner, and Julian handed Dave to the small girl.
Timmy was hauled up in the same way as he had been let down. He had badly wanted to stay withthe other dogs - but nothing would make him leave George!
'Well, that's that,' said Julian, scrambling out last of all. 'Now, let's see. We could toboggan down thisslope, and half-way up our own slope. That would save a lot of time. Aily, you're to come with us tothe farm.'
'No,' said Aily.
'Yes, Aily bach,' said Julian. 'I want you to.' He took her small hand in his and she smiled her suddenlittle smile, quite content to go along with this big kind boy, even though she was afraid of goingdown to the farm for fear she should meet her mother.
'Aily good girl,' said Julian, setting the little thing on his toboggan. 'Aily shall have big piece ofchocolate at the farm!'
They tobogganed down the slope at a great speed without any mishap, and half-way up the oppositeslope. It seemed queer to be out in the dazzling daylight after the dark tunnels underground. Theiradventure below began to seem slightly unreal!
'We'll leave the toboggans at the hut,' said Julian, as they dragged them up the rest of the slope.
'Anyone thirsty? I am. I think it must be something to do with that mine - my mouth got as dry asanything as soon as we were down there.'
Everyone said the same.
'I'll run into the hut and pour out some orangeade,' said Anne. 'You stack the toboggans in their place,Ju, and just see if there's enough oil in the can out in the bunker - we'll need to fill the stove tonight.
And if there isn't enough we must bring some up with us.'
Julian gave her the key of the hut and she unlocked it and went in with George. They pouredorangeade into five cups, and drank thirstily. Their mouths were drier than they had ever been before!
Anne felt thankful that she didn't have to wait any longer for a drink.
98
'I think the roof of my mouth would have stuck to my tongue!' she said, putting down her cup.
'That was lovely!'
'There's plenty of oil,' reported Julian, coming to drink his orangeade. 'My word - I needed this.
I'd not like to work down in that mine.'
They locked the hut and set off down to the farm, munching their sandwiches hungrily. They tastedvery good indeed, and even Aily asked for one after another. Timmy had his share, and once theymissed him, and had to stop and call him.
'Has he lost his bit of meat in the snow?' wondered Anne. But no - he, like the rest of them, wassuffering from a very dry mouth and was busy licking the snow, letting it melt in his mouth andtrickle down his dry throat!
Mrs. Jones was most surprised to see them. When she heard Julian's request to telephone to thepolice, she looked worried.
'It's all right, Mrs. Jones,' said Julian, comfortingly. 'It's a message to them from Morgan.
Everything is fine. We'll tell you what's happened as soon as he comes home. He might not like us tosay anything till then!'
The police did not seem at all surprised to hear Julian's message - they appeared to be expecting it!
'We will see to the matter,' said the sergeant, in his deep, stolid voice. 'Thank you.' And he rang off atonce. Julian wondered what would happen next - what had Morgan arranged?
They were pleased to see Mrs. Jones bringing in bowls of hot chicken soup, as they sat talking roundthe wood fire she had hurriedly lighted in the living-room.
'Oh! Just what we feel like!' said Anne, gratefully. 'I'm still awfully thirsty - aren't you, George?
And look, Timmy - there's a nice meaty bone for you! You are kind, Mrs. Jones!'
'You know - I feel pretty awful about all this now,' said Julian. 'We shouldn't have interfered afterMorgan said we weren't to. I wish we hadn't. He can't think much of us!'
'I vote we all apologise humbly,' said Dick. 'How could we have thought he was the villain of thepiece? I know he's dour and silent - but he didn't look mean or cruel.'
'We'd better stay down here at the farm till Morgan comes back,' said George. 'Quite apart fromwanting to say I'm sorry, I'd like to know what happened!'
'So would I,' said Anne. 'And Aily ought to wait for her father. He'll want to know that she's safe.'
99
So they asked Mrs. Jones if they could stay till Morgan came home. She was delighted.
'Of course, now,' she said. 'We've a roasting turkey today - and you shall come and sup with us in ourroom for a change!'
This all sounded rather good. The children gathered round their fire to talk, and Timmy rested hishead on George's knee. She looked at his neck.
'That man almost choked him,' she said. 'Oh look, Julian - he's bruised all round his poor neck!'
'Now don't start moaning over Timmy's neck again, for goodness' sake!' said Dick. 'Honestly,George, I'm sure Tim thinks the adventure was worth a bruised neck! He's not grumbling. He wasjolly brave, I think - and didn't he enjoy himself when the other dogs rushed into the cave, and hejoined in the fight!'
'I wonder what they'll do about that poor old woman,' said Anne. 'She will be glad her son is alive, Isuppose - but what a shock for her to know he's lied to her, and sold what is really hers -that strange metal under the hill!'
'Well - I imagine it won't be allowed to be sold now,' said Julian. 'What a plan that was! To get menup that tunnel to mine the stuff - and to send it down by rafts to waiting ships, hidden in that creek.
We ought to go down and examine the creek - it would be interesting to see what sort of a place it isdown there. It must be well hidden in a fold of the cliff, I should think.'
'Yes - let's do that tomorrow,' said George, thrilled. 'I vote we stay here tonight. I feel tired after suchan adventure! Don't you?'
'I do a bit,' said Julian. 'Well - I suppose there won't be quite so much shuddering and shimmeringand rumbling now! Funny that that hill should always have been so queer, isn't it -'ploughs that will not plough, spades that will not dig!' Must be some kind of iron, I suppose, thatmagnetises things. Oh well - it's all beyond me!'
Morgan came back with the shepherd when it was dark. Julian went straight up to the burly farmer.
'We want to apologise for being such idiots,' he said. 'We shouldn't have interfered after what yousaid.'
Morgan gave a broad smile. He seemed to be in a very good humour indeed.
'Forget it, boy,' he said. 'All's well now. The police came up the river tunnel, and all the men are safein jail. Llewellyn Thomas is a sad man tonight. His mother is free and is staying with friends 100- poor lady, she doesn't understand what has happened, and that is as well. And maybe now the rightpeople will get that strange metal - it's worth a hundred times its weight in gold!'
'Come you in to your supper, Morgan bach, and shepherd too!' said Mrs. Jones, in her lilting voice.
'The children too are coming. We've a roasting turkey - it's your birthday, Morgan boy!'
'Well there now, I didn't know it!' said Morgan and gave his mother such a hug that she squealed.
'Let's go in to the turkey. I've had nothing all day.'
Soon they were all sitting down before the most enormous turkey that the children had ever seen intheir lives! Morgan carved it swiftly. Then he said something to his mother in Welsh and she smiledand nodded.
'Yes, you do that,' she said.
Morgan collected some slices of turkey on a big enamel dish, and then went to the door that led fromthe living-room into the farmyard. He roared loudly and the children jumped. What a voice!
'DAI! TANG! BOB! DOON! JOLL! RAFE! HAL!'
'He's calling the dogs,' said Anne. 'Just as he called them up the tunnel. Well - they certainly deservea good dinner!'
Then down to the door came the seven dogs, jostling each other, barking excitedly. Morgan threwthem the slices of turkey, and they gobbled the tasty bits up greedily.
'Woof!' said Timmy politely from behind him, and Morgan turned. He solemnly cut a big slice and alittle slice.
'Here!' he said to Timmy and Dave. 'You did well too! Catch!'
'There'll not be much left of your birthday turkey!' said his mother, half-cross, half-amused. 'Now fillyour glasses again, children, and we will drink to my Morgan - a better son there never was!'
Anne poured home-made lemonade into the empty glasses, while Morgan sat and smiled, listening tohis seven dogs still barking together outside.
'Happy birthday, happy birthday!' shouted everyone, raising their glasses, and Julian added his ownfew words.
'Happy birthday, sir - and may your voice NEVER grow less!'
THE END
22.皆大欢喜
皆大欢喜
摩根不能让孩子们继续待在地底下了。
“我们必须行动起来，”他低沉着嗓子说，听上去已经十分沙哑了，“你们现在必须返回农场，并帮我报警。你们说‘摩根成功了’，然后告诉他们送一条船到事先已经约定好的小溪那里。我可以从那里沿着河道一路向下，把这些人运往大海。现在，马上动身。孩子们，这次一定要听我的！”
“好的，先生。”朱利安说。这个男人是个英雄！他早就想清楚要乖乖听他的指挥了。然后，他突然想起了什么事，转过身来。
“那位老太太，”他说，“托马斯太太——那个人的母亲，她怎么办？而且我们已经把看门人锁在房间里了！”
“你们不用管了，只要回农场打电话就行，”摩根严肃地说，“我会处理这里的一切。把艾丽也带回农场，她不能待在这儿。现在，快走吧！”
朱利安准备动身，他和其他小伙伴临走之前，环顾了一眼四周，所有坏蛋都被这些狗制伏，妥妥帖帖地趴在地上，一脸惊恐，动弹不得。随后，大家带着艾丽和她的小羊、小狗重新往回走，顺利回到了地窖里。
“我不想撇下老太太一个人待在这个古塔里。”迪克说。
“我也不想，但是摩根自有安排，”朱利安说，这一次他不打算违背摩根的任何安排，“我想他已经和警察商量好了。我们现在不能再干预了，而且我们已经搞砸了一些事。”
孩子们花了不少时间，才清醒冷静地返回了放雪橇的地方。他们现在感到有点饿了，但是朱利安没让大家停下吃三明治。“不行，”他说，“我们必须尽快报警！现在不能停下来！我们可以在下山回农场的路上慢慢吃。”
因为之前垂下了雪橇上的绳子，所以从壶穴中爬出去并不难。
朱利安和迪克帮两个女孩先爬了上去，然后两个女孩又拉着男孩子们出了壶穴。
艾丽轻松地爬了上去，在绳子上快乐地摇动向上拉拽，轻松地跳了出去。小羊以一种神奇的方式左蹦右跳跳了出去，大卫被朱利安举起，递给了已经在外面的艾丽。
蒂米则是和下来时一样，被裹着衣服捆着绳子拉上去，它原本很想和其他狗待在一起，但是它决不能离开乔治！
“好了，终于出来了！”朱利安最后一个爬出壶穴，松了一口气，“好，现在我想想，我们可以从这个斜坡上滑下去，然后滑到小屋那边的半坡，这样可以节省很多时间。艾丽，你跟我们一起去农场。”
“不！”艾丽说。
“一起去，小艾丽，”朱利安说，“我很想让你去。”他抓着她的小手，艾丽脸上泛起了微笑，尽管下山去农场很可能会碰见自己的妈妈，但她还是很开心能和这个友好的大男孩一起去。
“艾丽真是好孩子，”朱利安一边说，一边把她抱到雪橇上，“艾丽，我们可以去农场吃大块的巧克力！”
他们顺顺利利地快速启程，并成功滑上了半坡。在黑暗的地下通道里待了太久，突然活跃在耀眼的日光之下，还是有点不适应。
刚刚发生的一切冒险，感觉有些虚幻！
“我们得把雪橇放回小屋，”他们一边把雪橇往坡上拉，朱利安一边说，“你们口渴吗？我想这肯定和那些矿物质有关，我一进到那里，我的嘴巴就变得很干。”
大家都一样！
“我一会儿进小屋里拿些橙汁，”安妮说，“你们把雪橇放回原位，然后朱利安记得去看一下煤油罐子里还有没有足够的油，今天晚上我们要给炉子加油了，如果不够的话，必须得从农场带些上来。”
朱利安把钥匙给了安妮，然后安妮和乔治进了小屋，她们倒了五杯橙汁分给大家。所有人都前所未有地口渴，一拿起杯子便大口大口地喝光了。安妮也松了一口气，终于有机会解渴了。“我的上颚都要粘住我的舌头了！”她一边说，一边放下了手中的杯子，“现在感觉好多了！”
“还有很多油！”朱利安一喝完橙汁便回答安妮说，“我的天，橙汁太好喝了。我可不想在那矿井底下工作。”
随后，他们锁上小屋，动身出发去农场，一路上狼吞虎咽地吃着三明治。当然，这些三明治也的确非常美味，艾丽吃了一个又一个。蒂米也有份，可孩子们一下子找不着它了，便停下来呼唤它。
“它是把肉掉在雪地里了吗？”安妮想。其实不是，蒂米和孩子们一样，从洞里出来，也十分口渴。它正忙着用舌头舔雪，等雪融化后滋润干渴的喉咙。
看见他们返回农场，琼斯太太很是意外。当听到朱利安要求打电话报警时，她看上去非常着急。
“放心吧，琼斯太太，”朱利安安慰她说，“这是摩根让我帮忙转达的，一切平安无事。只要他一回来，我们就告诉您所有的事情，他现在可能还不想我们透露半个字。”
收到朱利安的讯息，警察们似乎一点也不惊讶，倒像是期待已久！
“我们会着手处理的，”警局接线员说，声音深沉而坚定，“谢谢你。”然后，电话挂断了。朱利安很好奇接下来会发生什么，摩根到底安排了什么呢？
孩子们坐在客厅里叽叽喳喳地讨论着，琼斯太太见状点燃了壁炉里的柴火，还给孩子们端来了热乎的鸡汤，孩子们高兴极了。
“哇！正合我意呢！”安妮感激地说，“我现在还是很渴，乔治你呢？蒂米你看，这儿还有块不错的肉骨头给你！琼斯太太，您真是太善良了！”
“各位，现在回想起今天发生的一切，想想都觉得可怕！”朱利安说，“摩根警告了我们之后，我们不该干涉这件事情的。多希望我们今天没有去。他肯定不希望我们去冒险。”
“我建议一会儿我们都诚恳地向他道歉，”迪克说，“我们怎么能以为他是这一带的恶棍呢！我知道他为人冷漠，不善言谈，但是看上去也并不刻薄冷酷。”
“我们最好在这里等摩根回来，”乔治说，“除了想说对不起，我还想知道后来发生了什么事！”
“我也是，”安妮说，“艾丽应该在这里等她的爸爸，他应该也想知道艾丽是否安全。”
大家询问了琼斯太太，能不能一直待到摩根回来，她欣然答应了。
“当然，”她说，“我们今天吃烤火鸡。你们来的真是时候，和我们一起分享美味，共度美好时光吧！”
这一切听起来棒极了。孩子们围在柴火前相谈甚欢，蒂米把头靠在乔治的腿上，乔治看了看它的脖子。
“那个人差点掐死它，”她说，“朱利安你看，它的脖子上满是淤青。”
“别再抱怨蒂米受伤的脖子了，”迪克说，“乔治，我敢说蒂米肯定认为这次冒险受伤是值得的！它没有抱怨愤懑，反而十分英勇。
当其他狗冲进山洞时，能和它们并肩作战，蒂米不也十分兴奋吗！”
“真不知道他们会怎么帮助那位可怜的老太太，”安妮说，“知道自己的儿子还活着，她一定很开心。但是如果知道自己的儿子对她撒谎，还卖掉了属于她的东西——那些埋藏在地里的金属矿，对她来说肯定是个不小的打击！”
“我想，现在是不允许再售卖了，”朱利安说，“他们的计划设计得真周全啊！让矿工们从隧道上来挖矿，然后通过竹筏运送到藏在小溪口的小船上。我们应该去检查一下小溪，去看看那个地方是什么样的，应该很有趣。我猜小船肯定巧妙地藏在了悬崖的裂缝里。”
“好啊，我们明天就去，”乔治激动不已，“我建议我们今晚就待在这儿，经过这次冒险之后，我累极了，你们不累吗？”
“我也累了，”朱利安说，“我想，现在那里应该不会再有震动的感觉、发光的东西和隆隆的噪音了！有趣的是，那座山竟然如此奇怪——‘犁不能耕，锹不能挖！’肯定还是和磁铁之类的有关！不过这可超纲了，我还真不知道答案！”
天快黑的时候，摩根和牧羊人回来了。朱利安径直朝那个魁梧的农夫走去。
“我们想为之前的愚蠢行为向您道歉，”他说，“在您警告我们之后，我们不该贸然行动！”
摩根露出了灿烂的笑容，事实上他好像很幽默。
“没关系，孩子，”他说，“现在一切尘埃落定。警察进入了地下河道，所有人都被安全关押到监狱里去了。卢埃林•托马斯今晚就惨了。他的母亲重获自由，这个可怜的老人现在和她的朋友们待在一起，她还被蒙在鼓里，不过这对她来说也好。或许现在，法律工作人员正在着手处理这些金属，它们的价值比黄金贵上百倍！”
“快来吃晚餐吧，我们的英雄摩根，我们的英雄牧羊人！”琼斯太太欢快地说，“孩子们也来。今晚我们吃火鸡，摩根，今天是你的生日！”
“是今天啊！我都忘了！”摩根一边说一边给了母亲一个惊喜的拥抱，“我们去吃火鸡吧，我一天都没吃东西了。”
很快，大家围坐在饭桌前，随后端上来了一只巨大无比的火鸡！摩根熟练地切起了火鸡，然后用威尔士语对母亲说了一些话，琼斯太太点头笑了笑。
“可以，你去吧。”她说。
摩根用一个大搪瓷盘装了些火鸡片，然后走到客厅正对农场的大门口。扯开嗓子大吼起来，吓了孩子们一大跳。
“戴！唐！鲍勃！杜恩！乔尔！拉菲！哈尔！”
“他在呼唤自己的狗，”安妮说，“就像他在河道里面那样。它们立了大功，确实值得奖励！”
七只忠犬朝门口跑来，你争我赶地，兴奋地叫着。摩根把火鸡片扔出去喂它们，狗狗们全都吃得津津有味，个个狼吞虎咽。
“汪！”蒂米站在摩根后面，叫了一声。摩根转过身来，郑重地又切下一大块和一小块。
“来！”他对蒂米和大卫说，“你们也是好样的！接着！”
“你的生日火鸡没剩多少了哦！”琼斯太太半生气半取乐地说，“现在，让我们倒满饮料，为摩根干杯，我这个独一无二的好儿子。”
安妮把自制柠檬汁倒进空杯。摩根这时候坐在位子上，高兴地笑着，听着门外七只忠犬吵闹的叫声。
“生日快乐！生日快乐！”大家齐声祝贺，举起杯子共饮。然后朱利安又接了两句话：
“摩根先生，生日快乐！祝您永远都有大嗓门！”
