1 Here Comes Charlie

1 Here Comes Charlie

These two very old people are the father and mother of Mr Bucket. Their names are
Grandpa Joe and Grandma Josephine.

And these two very old people are the father and mother of Mrs Bucket. Their names
are Grandpa George and Grandma Georgina.

This is Mr Bucket. This is Mrs Bucket.
Mr and Mrs Bucket have a small boy whose name is Charlie Bucket.

This is Charlie.
How d’you do? And how d’you do? And how d’you do again? He is pleased to meet
you.
The whole of this family - the six grown-ups (count them) and little Charlie Bucket -
live together in a small wooden house on the edge of a great town.

The house wasn’t nearly large enough for so many people, and life was extremely
uncomfortable for them all. There were only two rooms in the place altogether, and
there was only one bed. The bed was given to the four old grandparents because they
were so old and tired. They were so tired, they never got out of it.
Grandpa Joe and Grandma Josephine on this side, Grandpa George and Grandma
Georgina on this side.
Mr and Mrs Bucket and little Charlie Bucket slept in the other room, upon mattresses
on the floor.
In the summertime, this wasn’t too bad, but in the winter, freezing cold draughts blew
across the floor all night long, and it was awful.
There wasn’t any question of them being able to buy a better house - or even one
more bed to sleep in. They were far too poor for that.
Mr Bucket was the only person in the family with a job. He worked in a toothpaste
factory, where he sat all day long at a bench and screwed the little caps on to the tops of
the tubes of toothpaste after the tubes had been filled. But a toothpaste cap-screwer is
never paid very much money, and poor Mr Bucket, however hard he worked, and
however fast he screwed on the caps, was never able to make enough to buy one half of
the things that so large a family needed. There wasn’t even enough money to buy proper
food for them all. The only meals they could afford were bread and margarine for
breakfast, boiled potatoes and cabbage for lunch, and cabbage soup for supper. Sundays
were a bit better. They all looked forward to Sundays because then, although they had
exactly the same, everyone was allowed a second helping.
The Buckets, of course, didn’t starve, but every one of them - the two old
grandfathers, the two old grandmothers, Charlie’s father, Charlie’s mother, and
especially little Charlie himself - went about from morning till night with a horrible
empty feeling in their tummies.
Charlie felt it worst of all. And although his father and mother often went without
their own share of lunch or supper so that they could give it to him, it still wasn’t nearly
enough for a growing boy. He desperately wanted something more filling and satisfying
than cabbage and cabbage soup. The one thing he longed for more than anything else
was… CHOCOLATE.
Walking to school in the mornings, Charlie could see great slabs of chocolate piled up
high in the shop windows, and he would stop and stare and press his nose against the
glass, his mouth watering like mad. Many times a day, he would see other children
taking bars of creamy chocolate out of their pockets and munching them greedily, and
that, of course, was pure torture.
Only once a year, on his birthday, did Charlie Bucket ever get to taste a bit of
chocolate. The whole family saved up their money for that special occasion, and when
the great day arrived, Charlie was always presented with one small chocolate bar to eat
all by himself. And each time he received it, on those marvellous birthday mornings, he
would place it carefully in a small wooden box that he owned, and treasure it as though
it were a bar of solid gold; and for the next few days, he would allow himself only to
look at it, but never to touch it. Then at last, when he could stand it no longer, he would
peel back a tiny bit of the paper wrapping at one corner to expose a tiny bit of chocolate,
and then he would take a tiny nibble - just enough to allow the lovely sweet taste to
spread out slowly over his tongue. The next day, he would take another tiny nibble, and
so on, and so on. And in this way, Charlie would make his sixpenny bar of birthday
chocolate last him for more than a month.
But I haven’t yet told you about the one awful thing that tortured little Charlie, the
lover of chocolate, more than anything else. This thing, for him, was far, far worse than
seeing slabs of chocolate in the shop windows or watching other children munching bars
of creamy chocolate right in front of him. It was the most terrible torturing thing you
could imagine, and it was this:
In the town itself, actually within sight of the house in which Charlie lived, there was
an ENORMOUS CHOCOLATE FACTORY!
Just imagine that!
And it wasn’t simply an ordinary enormous chocolate factory, either. It was the largest
and most famous in the whole world! It was WONKA’S FACTORY, owned by a man
called Mr Willy Wonka, the greatest inventor and maker of chocolates that there has
ever been. And what a tremendous, marvellous place it was! It had huge iron gates
leading into it, and a high wall surrounding it, and smoke belching from its chimneys,
and strange whizzing sounds coming from deep inside it. And outside the walls, for half
a mile around in every direction, the air was scented with the heavy rich smell of
melting chocolate!
Twice a day, on his way to and from school, little Charlie Bucket had to walk right
past the gates of the factory. And every time he went by, he would begin to walk very,
very slowly, and he would hold his nose high in the air and take long deep sniffs of the
gorgeous chocolatey smell all around him.
Oh, how he loved that smell!
And oh, how he wished he could go inside the factory and see what it was like!
1　查理

1　查理

这两位很老的老人家是巴克特先生的爸爸和妈妈。他们被称为约瑟夫爷爷和约瑟芬奶
奶。
这两位很老的老人家是巴克特太太的爸爸和妈妈。他们被称为乔治姥爷和乔治娜姥姥。
这一位是巴克特先生。这一位是巴克特太太。
巴克特先生和巴克特太太有一个小男孩，他叫查理•巴克特。
这就是查理。
你好！你好！再说一声你好！
他很高兴见到你呢！
这一家共有六个大人（请你数数看）和一个叫做查理•巴克特的孩子，全家住在一个大市
镇边上的一栋小木屋里。
木屋很小，简直住不下这么多人，他们住得不舒服极了。木屋里总共只有两个房间和一
张床。这张床让给了四位老人家睡，因为他们又老又没有力气。他们太没有力气了，所以从
来不下床。
约瑟夫爷爷和约瑟芬奶奶睡在床的这一头，乔治姥爷和乔治娜姥姥睡在床的那一头。
巴克特先生、巴克特太太和小查理•巴克特睡在隔壁房间地板的垫子上面。
夏天还能这样将就着过，到了冬天，刺骨的寒风整夜在地板上面吹过，那就受不了啦。
他们不指望会买一栋好点的房子，或者多买一张床来睡。他们太穷了！
全家只有巴克特先生一个人工作。他在一家牙膏厂里做工，整天坐在长凳上给装好了牙
膏的牙膏管旋上小盖子。但一个旋牙膏管盖子的工人，工钱是不会很多的。可怜的巴克特先
生，不管怎样拼命地工作，不管他旋牙膏管盖子有多快，他挣到的钱怎么也不够买这么大一
家人所需东西的一半。这点钱甚至不够买食物让大家吃饱。他们的早餐只能吃面包和人造牛
油，午餐吃土豆和卷心菜，晚餐吃卷心菜汤。他们星期日吃得好一点儿。他们全都巴望着星
期日到来，因为这一天他们吃的东西虽然和平时吃的一模一样，但每人可以再添一点儿。
当然，巴克特一家人没有饿死，但每一个人——老爷爷和老奶奶、老姥爷和老姥姥、查
理的爸爸和查理的妈妈，特别是小查理——从早到晚都有一种肚子空空的感觉。
最感到肚子空空的是查理。虽然他的爸爸妈妈常常把自己的一份午餐或者晚餐让给他
吃，但对一个正在发育的孩子来说，这还是不够的。他需要比卷心菜和卷心菜汤更能充饥和
更好吃的东西。他最向往的就是——巧克力糖。
查理每天早晨上学，看到商店橱窗里堆得高高的大块大块的巧克力糖就会停下脚步，把
鼻子贴着橱窗看，大流口水。一天里有许多次，他眼看着别的孩子从衣袋里掏出一块块奶油
巧克力糖，吧嗒吧嗒地大嚼特嚼。不用说，这纯粹是一种折磨。
一年当中，只有在过生日那天，查理•巴克特才能尝到一点儿巧克力糖。全家人为了这个
特殊的日子，把他们的钱省了下来。等这个重大日子一到，他们总是送给查理一块小小的巧
克力糖，全归他一个人吃。每次在美好的生日早晨收到这样一块巧克力糖时，查理总把它小
心地放在自己的一个小木盒里，宝贝得像是一根金条。开头几天他只是看着，从来不去碰
它，后来实在忍不住了，他才把包糖纸的一角拉开一点点，露出一点点巧克力糖，然后轻轻
地咬一点点，只让那可口的甜味足够在舌头上慢慢地散开。第二天他再咬一点点，第三天又
咬一点点，一天天这样一点点咬下去。用这个办法，一小块六便士的生日巧克力糖，查理可
以吃上一个多月。
但是我还没有告诉你一样可怕的东西，它比任何其他东西更折磨着这位爱吃巧克力糖的
小查理。对他来说，这一样东西比看见商店橱窗里的一块块巧克力糖，比看到别的小朋友当
着他的面大嚼特嚼奶油巧克力糖更使他难受得多。它是你想得出来的最可怕的折磨人的东
西，这东西就是：
在这个市镇里，说实在的，就在查理家可以看到的地方，有一家巧克力大工厂！
你就想象一下吧！
而且这不是一家普通的巧克力大工厂。它是全世界最大最有名的巧克力工厂！它就是旺
卡工厂。老板叫做威利•旺卡先生，是前所未有的最伟大的巧克力发明家和制造商。这又是一
个多么巨大宏伟、不可思议的地方啊！它有一扇大铁门，四周围着高墙，烟囱冒出烟来，从
工厂深处传出奇怪的呜呜声。墙外方圆一千米，空气中都可以闻到融化的巧克力的浓郁香
味！
一天两次，小查理•巴克特上学和放学都正好要走过这家工厂的大门。每次走过，他都会
禁不住把脚步放得非常非常慢，高高地抬起鼻子，深深地久久吸进他周围沁人心脾的巧克力
香气。
唉，他多么喜欢这香气呀！
唉，他多么渴望能走进这家工厂，看看里面是什么样子啊！
2 Mr Willy Wonka’s Factory
2 Mr Willy Wonka’s Factory
In the evenings, after he had finished his supper of watery cabbage soup, Charlie always
went into the room of his four grandparents to listen to their stories, and then afterwards
to say good night.
Every one of these old people was over ninety. They were as shrivelled as prunes, and
as bony as skeletons, and throughout the day, until Charlie made his appearance, they
lay huddled in their one bed, two at either end, with nightcaps on to keep their heads
warm, dozing the time away with nothing to do. But as soon as they heard the door
opening, and heard Charlie’s voice saying, ‘Good evening, Grandpa Joe and Grandma
Josephine, and Grandpa George and Grandma Georgina,’ then all four of them would
suddenly sit up, and their old wrinkled faces would light up with smiles of pleasure -
and the talking would begin. For they loved this little boy. He was the only bright thing
in their lives, and his evening visits were something that they looked forward to all day
long. Often, Charlie’s mother and father would come in as well, and stand by the door,
listening to the stories that the old people told; and thus, for perhaps half an hour every
night, this room would become a happy place, and the whole family would forget that it
was hungry and poor.
One evening, when Charlie went in to see his grandparents, he said to them, ‘Is it
really true that Wonka’s Chocolate Factory is the biggest in the world?’
‘True?’ cried all four of them at once. ‘Of course it’s true! Good heavens, didn’t you
know that? It’s about fifty times as big as any other!’
‘And is Mr Willy Wonka really the cleverest chocolate maker in the world?’
‘My dear boy,’ said Grandpa Joe, raising himself up a little higher on his pillow, ‘Mr
Willy Wonka is the most amazing, the most fantastic, the most extraordinary chocolate
maker the world has ever seen! I thought everybody knew that!’
‘I knew he was famous, Grandpa Joe, and I knew he was very clever…’
‘Clever!’ cried the old man. ‘He’s more than that! He’s a magician with chocolate! He
can make anything - anything he wants! Isn’t that a fact, my dears?’
The other three old people nodded their heads slowly up and down, and said,
‘Absolutely true. Just as true as can be.’
And Grandpa Joe said, ‘You mean to say I’ve never told you about Mr Willy Wonka
and his factory?’
‘Never,’ answered little Charlie.
‘Good heavens above! I don’t know what’s the matter with me!’
‘Will you tell me now, Grandpa Joe, please?’
‘I certainly will. Sit down beside me on the bed, my dear, and listen carefully.’
Grandpa Joe was the oldest of the four grandparents. He was ninety-six and a half,
and that is just about as old as anybody can be. Like all extremely old people, he was
delicate and weak, and throughout the day he spoke very little. But in the evenings,
when Charlie, his beloved grandson, was in the room, he seemed in some marvellous
way to grow quite young again. All his tiredness fell away from him, and he became as
eager and excited as a young boy.
‘Oh, what a man he is, this Mr Willy Wonka!’ cried Grandpa Joe. ‘Did you know, for
example, that he has himself invented more than two hundred new kinds of chocolate
bars, each with a different centre, each far sweeter and creamier and more delicious
than anything the other chocolate factories can make!’
‘Perfectly true!’ cried Grandma Josephine. ‘And he sends them to all the four corners
of the earth! Isn’t that so, Grandpa Joe?’
‘It is, my dear, it is. And to all the kings and presidents of the world as well. But it
isn’t only chocolate bars that he makes. Oh, dear me, no! He has some really fantastic
inventions up his sleeve, Mr Willy Wonka has! Did you know that he’s invented a way of
making chocolate ice cream so that it stays cold for hours and hours without being in
the refrigerator? You can even leave it lying in the sun all morning on a hot day and it
won’t go runny!’
‘But that’s impossible!’ said little Charlie, staring at his grandfather.
‘Of course it’s impossible!’ cried Grandpa Joe. ‘It’s completely absurd! But Mr Willy
Wonka has done it!’
‘Quite right!’ the others agreed, nodding their heads. ‘Mr Wonka has done it.’
‘And then again,’ Grandpa Joe went on speaking very slowly now so that Charlie
wouldn’t miss a word, ‘Mr Willy Wonka can make marshmallows that taste of violets,
and rich caramels that change colour every ten seconds as you suck them, and little
feathery sweets that melt away deliriously the moment you put them between your lips.
He can make chewing-gum that never loses its taste, and sugar balloons that you can
blow up to enormous sizes before you pop them with a pin and gobble them up. And, by
a most secret method, he can make lovely blue birds’ eggs with black spots on them, and
when you put one of these in your mouth, it gradually gets smaller and smaller until
suddenly there is nothing left except a tiny little pink sugary baby bird sitting on the tip
of your tongue.’
Grandpa Joe paused and ran the point of his tongue slowly over his lips. ‘It makes my
mouth water just thinking about it,’ he said.
‘Mine, too,’ said little Charlie. ‘But please go on.’
While they were talking, Mr and Mrs Bucket, Charlie’s mother and father, had come
quietly into the room, and now both were standing just inside the door, listening.
‘Tell Charlie about that crazy Indian prince,’ said Grandma Josephine. ‘He’d like to
hear that.’
‘You mean Prince Pondicherry?’ said Grandpa Joe, and he began chuckling with
laughter.
‘Completely dotty!’ said Grandpa George.
‘But very rich,’ said Grandma Georgina.
‘What did he do?’ asked Charlie eagerly.
‘Listen,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘and I’ll tell you.’
2　威利·旺卡先生的工厂
2　威利•旺卡先生的工厂
每天晚上，查理吃完他那顿清汤寡水的卷心菜汤晚餐以后，总是走进四位老人家的房间
去听他们讲故事，然后才道过晚安离开。
这四位老人家都已年过九十。他们皱缩得像李子干，皮包骨头像骷髅。整整一天，在查
理来看望他们以前，他们都挤在同一张床上躺着，两个一头，头上戴着睡帽保暖，无事可
做，打着盹消磨时间。但是一听到门响，听到查理的声音——“你们好，约瑟夫爷爷，约瑟芬
奶奶，乔治姥爷，乔治娜姥姥”，他们四个一下子全都坐起来，布满皱纹的老脸便露出快活的
微笑，便亮堂起来，谈话也就开始了，因为他们非常爱这个小孩子。他是老人家生命中唯一
的光明，他们整天等的就是他晚上来看他们。查理的妈妈和爸爸也常常进来，站在门边听老
人家讲故事。这样，每天晚上约有半个小时，这个房间成为一个快乐的地方，全家人忘掉了
饥饿和贫困。
一天晚上，当查理进来看望祖父、祖母和外祖父、外祖母的时候，他对他们说：“旺卡巧
克力工厂是世界上最大的巧克力工厂，这是真的吗？”
“真的？”四位老人家同时叫起来，“当然是真的！天哪，这件事你还不知道吗？它大约是
任何一家巧克力工厂的五十倍那么大！”
“那么，威利•旺卡先生真的是世界上最聪明的巧克力制造商吗？”
“我亲爱的孩子，”约瑟夫爷爷从他的枕头上抬起一点儿身子说，“威利•旺卡先生是世界上
有过的最惊人、最不可思议、最非凡的巧克力制造商！我还以为这件事人人都知道呢！”
“我也知道他很有名，约瑟夫爷爷，我也知道他很聪明……”
“聪明！”那老人家叫道，“他岂止聪明，他是一位制造巧克力的魔术师！他能制造任何东
西——他要什么就能制造什么！这不是事实吗，我亲爱的太太和亲家们？”
另外三位老人家慢慢把头一上一下地点着说：“绝对是真的，真是千真万确。”
约瑟夫爷爷又说：“你是说，威利•旺卡先生和他那家工厂的事，我从来没有告诉过你？”
“从来没有。”小查理回答说。
“天哪！我不知道我这是怎么啦！”
“那么请你现在告诉我好吗，约瑟夫爷爷？”
“我当然要告诉你。坐到我的床边来吧！我亲爱的，好好听着。”
约瑟夫爷爷是四位老人家中最老的一位。他已经九十六岁半，一般人大概就只能活那么
老。和所有极老的人一样，他很虚弱，整天不说什么。但到晚上，当他心爱的孙子查理到房
间里来时，他好像奇迹般地又变得十分年轻。他的虚弱样子一下子消失得无影无踪，变得像
个小孩子一样又起劲又兴奋。
“噢，这位威利•旺卡先生是怎么个人啊！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“比方说，你知道吗？他一个
人就发明了两百多种新的巧克力糖，各有不同的夹心，比任何一家巧克力工厂的巧克力糖都
要甜得多，奶油味浓得多，好吃得多！”
“一点儿不假！”约瑟芬奶奶叫道，“他把它们销售到地球的每一个角落！不是这样吗，约
瑟夫爷爷？”
“是的，我亲爱的，正是这样。威利•旺卡先生还把巧克力糖送给世界各国的国王和总统。
不过他不止制造巧克力糖。噢，天哪，不是的！他还有一些真正异想天开的发明。这位威利•
旺卡先生真有一套绝招！你知道吗？他发明了一种办法制造巧克力冰淇淋！这种冰淇淋不用
放进冰箱，却可以许多许多个钟头保持冰冻。即使在大热天，你把它放在太阳底下一个上午
也不会融化！”
“但那是不可能的！”小查理看着他的爷爷说。
“当然不可能！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“这简直是荒谬！但是威利•旺卡先生做到了！”
“一点儿不假！”另外几位老人家点头同意说，“威利•旺卡先生做到了。”
“还有，”约瑟夫爷爷现在很慢地说下去，因此查理一个字也不会听漏，“威利•旺卡先生能
够做出有紫罗兰香味的软糖、舔下去每十秒钟变一次颜色的牛奶糖、进口就会甜津津地融化
的棉花糖。他能够做出永不失去甜味的口香糖，只要不用针刺破、不用口咬破便可以吹得其
大无比的泡泡糖。他还用最秘密的办法制造出带黑点的蓝色鸟蛋，你把这样一个蛋放到嘴
里，它会愈变愈小，最后一下子，舌尖上只剩下一只很小很小的粉红色糖鸟。”
约瑟夫爷爷停下来，舌尖在嘴唇上慢慢地舔动。“一想到这个就叫我要流口水。”他说。
“我也一样，”小查理说，“不过请你说下去吧！”
在他们谈着说着的时候，查理的爸爸妈妈巴克特先生和巴克特太太已经悄悄地走进房
间，这时候双双站在门边听着。
“给查理讲讲那印度疯王子吧！”约瑟芬奶奶说，“他会喜欢听那个故事的。”
“你说的是本地治里 [1] 王子吗？”约瑟夫爷爷说着，咯咯地笑起来。
“他疯透了！”乔治姥爷说。
“但是非常富有。”乔治娜姥姥说。
“他做什么事啦？”查理急着问。
“听着！”约瑟夫爷爷说，“我来告诉你。”
[1]本地治里是印度的一个地名。
3 Mr Wonka and the Indian Prince
3 Mr Wonka and the Indian Prince
‘Prince Pondicherry wrote a letter to Mr Willy Wonka,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘and asked him
to come all the way out to India and build him a colossal palace entirely out of
chocolate.’
‘Did Mr Wonka do it, Grandpa?’
‘He did, indeed. And what a palace it was! It had one hundred rooms, and everything
was made of either dark or light chocolate! The bricks were chocolate, and the cement
holding them together was chocolate, and the windows were chocolate, and all the walls
and ceilings were made of chocolate, so were the carpets and the pictures and the
furniture and the beds; and when you turned on the taps in the bathroom, hot chocolate
came pouring out.
‘When it was all finished, Mr Wonka said to Prince Pondicherry, “I warn you, though,
it won’t last very long, so you’d better start eating it right away.”
‘ “Nonsense!” shouted the Prince. “I’m not going to eat my palace! I’m not even going
to nibble the staircase or lick the walls! I’m going to live in it!”
‘But Mr Wonka was right, of course, because soon after this, there came a very hot
day with a boiling sun, and the whole palace began to melt, and then it sank slowly to
the ground, and the crazy prince, who was dozing in the living room at the time, woke
up to find himself swimming around in a huge brown sticky lake of chocolate.’
Little Charlie sat very still on the edge of the bed, staring at his grandfather. Charlie’s
face was bright, and his eyes were stretched so wide you could see the whites all around.
‘Is all this really true?’ he asked. ‘Or are you pulling my leg?’
‘It’s true!’ cried all four of the old people at once. ‘Of course it’s true! Ask anyone you
like!’
‘And I’ll tell you something else that’s true,’ said Grandpa Joe, and now he leaned
closer to Charlie, and lowered his voice to a soft, secret whisper. ‘Nobody… ever…
comes… out!’
‘Out of where?’ asked Charlie.
‘And… nobody… ever… goes… in!’
‘In where?’ cried Charlie.
‘Wonka’s factory, of course!’
‘Grandpa, what do you mean?’
‘I mean workers, Charlie.’
‘Workers?’
‘All factories,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘have workers streaming in and out of the gates in
the mornings and evenings - except Wonka’s! Have you ever seen a single person going
into that place - or coming out?’
Little Charlie looked slowly around at each of the four old faces, one after the other,
and they all looked back at him. They were friendly smiling faces, but they were also
quite serious. There was no sign of joking or leg-pulling on any of them.
‘Well? Have you?’ asked Grandpa Joe.
‘I… I really don’t know, Grandpa,’ Charlie stammered. ‘Whenever I walk past the
factory, the gates seem to be closed.’
‘Exactly!’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘But there must be people working there…’
‘Not people, Charlie. Not ordinary people, anyway.’
‘Then who?’ cried Charlie.
‘Ah-ha… That’s it, you see… That’s another of Mr Willy Wonka’s clevernesses.’
‘Charlie, dear,’ Mrs Bucket called out from where she was standing by the door, ‘it’s
time for bed. That’s enough for tonight.’
‘But, Mother, I must hear…’
‘Tomorrow, my darling…’
‘That’s right,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘I’ll tell you the rest of it tomorrow evening.’
3　旺卡先生和印度王子
3　旺卡先生和印度王子
“本地治里王子写了一封信给威利•旺卡先生，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“请他远渡重洋到印度去，
给他用巧克力糖盖一座大宫殿。”
“旺卡先生去盖了吗，爷爷？”
“他当然盖了。这是一座怎么样的宫殿啊！里面有一百个房间，不是用黑巧克力就是用白
巧克力做成！砖头是巧克力的，把砖头粘起来的水泥也是巧克力的，窗子是巧克力的，所有
的墙和天花板也是巧克力的，还有地毯、图画、家具和床也是巧克力的，一打开浴室的水龙
头，热巧克力就哗哗地流下来。
“宫殿盖好以后，旺卡先生对本地治里王子说：‘不过我提醒你，它维持不了多久，你最
好马上就把它吃掉。’
“‘胡说！’王子喊道，‘我不打算吃我的宫殿！我甚至不会去啃楼梯或者舔墙壁！我要住在
里面！’
“不过，旺卡先生的话自然是对的，因为过了不久，有一天天气非常热，太阳火辣辣的，
整座宫殿开始融化了。它慢慢地塌到地面。那个疯王子这时正在客厅里打盹，等到醒来，发
觉自己正在一个黏糊糊的棕色巧克力大湖里游来游去。”
小查理一动不动地坐在床边，定睛看着他的爷爷。查理的脸发亮，眼睛睁得那么大，甚
至可以看到眼珠周围的眼白。“这一切确实是真的吗？”他问道，“还是你在骗我呢？”
“是真的！”四位老人家同时叫起来，“当然是真的！你可以随便去问什么人！”
“我再告诉你另一件千真万确的事情，”约瑟夫爷爷说，他向查理靠近一些，把声音压低
到成为很轻的悄悄话，“从来……没有人……出来过！”
“从哪里出来？”查理问道。
“也……从来……没有人……进去过！”
“进哪里去？”查理叫道。
“旺卡工厂啊，这还用说！”
“爷爷，你说的到底是谁？”
“我说的是工人，查理。”
“工人？”
“在所有的工厂，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“一早一晚总是有工人鱼贯地进出工厂的大门，只是旺
卡的工厂除外！你见过有一个人进那地方或者出来吗？”
小查理慢慢地转过头来看四位老人家一张一张的脸，他们也看着他。每张都是友善的
脸，但又十分严肃。在任何一张脸上都没有开玩笑或者愚弄人的表情。
“怎么样？你见过吗？”约瑟夫爷爷问道。
“我……我确实不知道，爷爷，”查理结结巴巴地说，“每次我经过工厂，大门好像都是关
着的。”
“正是这样！”约瑟夫爷爷说。
“但里面一定有人在工作……”
“不是人，查理，至少不是普通的人。”
“那么是谁呢？”查理叫起来。
“对了……你瞧，就是这样……那是威利•旺卡先生的又一个绝招。”
“查理，亲爱的，”巴克特太太从门边她站着的地方喊过来，“该去睡觉了。今天晚上讲到
这里已经够啦。”
“可是妈妈，我一定要听……”
“明天听吧，我的小宝贝……”
“对，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“明天晚上我继续给你说下去。”
4 The Secret Workers
4 The Secret Workers
The next evening, Grandpa Joe went on with his story.
‘You see, Charlie,’ he said, ‘not so very long ago there used to be thousands of people
working in Mr Willy Wonka’s factory. Then one day, all of a sudden, Mr Wonka had to
ask every single one of them to leave, to go home, never to come back.’
‘But why?’ asked Charlie.
‘Because of spies.’
‘Spies?’
‘Yes. All the other chocolate makers, you see, had begun to grow jealous of the
wonderful sweets that Mr Wonka was making, and they started sending in spies to steal
his secret recipes. The spies took jobs in the Wonka factory, pretending that they were
ordinary workers, and while they were there, each one of them found out exactly how a
certain special thing was made.’
‘And did they go back to their own factories and tell?’ asked Charlie.
‘They must have,’ answered Grandpa Joe, ‘because soon after that, Fickelgruber’s
factory started making an ice cream that would never melt, even in the hottest sun. Then
Mr Prodnose’s factory came out with a chewing-gum that never lost its flavour however
much you chewed it. And then Mr Slugworth’s factory began making sugar balloons that
you could blow up to huge sizes before you popped them with a pin and gobbled them
up. And so on, and so on. And Mr Willy Wonka tore his beard and shouted, “This is
terrible! I shall be ruined! There are spies everywhere! I shall have to close the factory!”
’
‘But he didn’t do that!’ Charlie said.
‘Oh, yes he did. He told all the workers that he was sorry, but they would have to go
home. Then, he shut the main gates and fastened them with a chain. And suddenly,
Wonka’s giant chocolate factory became silent and deserted. The chimneys stopped
smoking, the machines stopped whirring, and from then on, not a single chocolate or
sweet was made. Not a soul went in or out, and even Mr Willy Wonka himself
disappeared completely.
‘Months and months went by,’ Grandpa Joe went on, ‘but still the factory remained
closed. And everybody said, “Poor Mr Wonka. He was so nice. And he made such
marvellous things. But he’s finished now. It’s all over.”
‘Then something astonishing happened. One day, early in the morning, thin columns
of white smoke were seen to be coming out of the tops of the tall chimneys of the
factory! People in the town stopped and stared. “What’s going on?” they cried.
“Someone’s lit the furnaces! Mr Wonka must be opening up again!” They ran to the
gates, expecting to see them wide open and Mr Wonka standing there to welcome his
workers back.
‘But no! The great iron gates were still locked and chained as securely as ever, and Mr
Wonka was nowhere to be seen.
‘ “But the factory is working!” the people shouted. “Listen! You can hear the
machines! They’re all whirring again! And you can smell the smell of melting chocolate
in the air!” ’
Grandpa Joe leaned forward and laid a long bony finger on Charlie’s knee, and he said
softly, ‘But most mysterious of all, Charlie, were the shadows in the windows of the
factory. The people standing on the street outside could see small dark shadows moving
about behind the frosted glass windows.’
‘Shadows of whom?’ said Charlie quickly.
‘That’s exactly what everybody else wanted to know.
‘ “The place is full of workers!” the people shouted. “But nobody’s gone in! The gates
are locked! It’s crazy! Nobody ever comes out, either!”
‘But there was no question at all,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘that the factory was running.
And it’s gone on running ever since, for these last ten years. What’s more, the chocolates
and sweets it’s been turning out have become more fantastic and delicious all the time.
And of course now when Mr Wonka invents some new and wonderful sweet, neither Mr
Fickelgruber nor Mr Prodnose nor Mr Slugworth nor anybody else is able to copy it. No
spies can go into the factory to find out how it is made.’
‘But Grandpa, who,’ cried Charlie, ‘who is Mr Wonka using to do all the work in the
factory?’
‘Nobody knows, Charlie.’
‘But that’s ahsurd! Hasn’t someone asked Mr Wonka?’
‘Nobody sees him any more. He never comes out. The only things that come out of
that place are chocolates and sweets. They come out through a special trap door in the
wall, all packed and addressed, and they are picked up every day by Post Office trucks.’
‘But Grandpa, what sort of people are they that work in there?’
‘My dear boy,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘that is one of the great mysteries of the chocolate-
making world. We know only one thing about them. They are very small. The faint
shadows that sometimes appear behind the windows, especially late at night when the
lights are on, are those of tiny people, people no taller than my knee…’
‘There aren’t any such people,’ Charlie said.
Just then, Mr Bucket, Charlie’s father, came into the room. He was home from the
toothpaste factory, and he was waving an evening newspaper rather excitedly. ‘Have you
heard the news?’ he cried. He held up the paper so that they could see the huge
headline. The headline said:
WONKA FACTORY TO BE OPENED AT LAST TO LUCKY FEW
4　秘密工人
4　秘密工人
第二天晚上，约瑟夫爷爷继续讲他的故事。
“你知道吗？查理，”他说，“在不太久以前，威利•旺卡先生的工厂里一直有几千人在工
作。但忽然有一天，旺卡先生不得不请所有的工人一个不剩地都离开他的工厂回家，永远不
要再回去。”
“但这是为什么呢？”查理问道。
“因为有间谍。”
“间谍？”
“对。你知道，威利•旺卡先生能够制造了不起的糖果，别的巧克力糖制造商都开始妒忌
了，于是派出间谍去窃取他的秘密配方。间谍们假装普通工人在旺卡工厂工作，到了工厂
里，每一个间谍打听某一种特别的糖果到底是怎样制造的。”
“他们回到自己的工厂去报告了吗？”查理问道。
“他们一定报告了，”约瑟夫爷爷回答说，“因为过了不久，菲克尔格鲁伯先生的工厂也开
始生产那种在最炎热的太阳底下也不会融化的冰淇淋。接着普罗德诺斯先生的工厂推出一种
不管嚼多久也不会失去甜味的口香糖。再接着斯拉格沃思先生的工厂开始制造只要不用针刺
破、不用口咬破便可以吹得其大无比的泡泡糖。如此等等。威利•旺卡先生于是扯着他的胡子
大叫着：‘这太可怕了！我要破产了！到处都是间谍！我必须关掉我的工厂！’”
“但他没有关！”查理说。
“噢，他关了。他对所有的工人说他很抱歉，但是他们只好回家。接着他关上工厂的大铁
门，还拴上铁链。旺卡的大巧克力工厂一下子变得寂静无人。烟囱不冒烟了，机器停止转动
了，从此再没有生产过一块巧克力糖或者其他糖果。没有一个人进出，连威利•旺卡先生本人
也消失得无影无踪。
“一个月一个月过去，”约瑟夫爷爷说下去，“工厂还是关闭着。大家都说：‘可怜的旺卡先
生，他那么个好人，制造出那么了不起的糖果，但是他现在完了，全完啦。’
“但惊人的事情发生了。一天大清早，工厂高高的烟囱顶上升起了一缕缕淡淡的白烟！城
里的人们停下来看。‘发生什么事啦？’他们叫道，‘锅炉烧起来了！旺卡先生一定又开工
啦！’他们跑到工厂门口，希望见到厂门大开，旺卡先生站在那里欢迎他的工人们回去工作。
“但是没有！大铁门依旧锁着，铁链依旧牢牢地拴着，根本看不到旺卡先生。
“‘不过工厂是开工了！’人们叫道，‘你可以听到机器在响！它们全都重新嗡嗡地转动了！
你又可以闻到空气中融化的巧克力的香味了！’”
约瑟夫爷爷把身体俯向前，把一根瘦骨嶙峋的长手指放在查理的膝盖上，轻轻地说：“但
最神秘的事情，查理，是映在工厂窗上的人影。人们站在外面街上可以看到，在磨砂玻璃窗
里面有小黑影在动。”
“谁的影子呢？”查理连忙问。
“这正是人人都想知道的。”约瑟夫爷爷说。
“‘里面全是工人！’人们叫道，‘但是没有人进去过！工厂的门锁着！简直是莫名其妙！也
没有人出来过！’
“但工厂开工了这是毫无疑问的，”约瑟夫爷爷说道，“自此以后，这十年来它一直在开
工，而且它生产出来的巧克力糖和各种糖果愈来愈稀奇，愈来愈好吃。当然，现在旺卡先生
发明出来的顶呱呱的新品种糖果，不管是菲克尔格鲁伯先生、普罗德诺斯先生，还是斯拉格
沃思先生，反正不管是谁，全没有办法仿造了。再也没有间谍能混进工厂，打听出这些糖果
是怎样制造的了。”
“不过爷爷，是什么人，”查理问道，“是什么人被旺卡先生请到工厂里做这些工作呢？”
“谁也不知道，查理。”
“但那太荒唐了！没有人问过旺卡先生吗？”
“根本没有人再见过他。他从不出来。从工厂里出来的只有巧克力糖和其他糖果。它们通
过墙上一扇特制的活板门出来，全都包装好了，并写上了地址，一辆辆邮车每天来运走。”
“不过，爷爷，在里面工作的到底是些什么人呢？”
“我亲爱的孩子，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“那是巧克力糖制造业中重大的谜之一。关于他们，我
们知道的只有一件事：他们非常小。有时候，特别是在深夜灯亮了以后，窗上出现的模糊影
子都是小矮人的影子，这些人顶多只到我的膝盖高……”
“这样的人是没有的。”查理说。
就在这时候，查理的爸爸巴克特先生走进房间。他刚从牙膏厂下班回家，十分兴奋地挥
动着手里的晚报。“你们听到这个消息了吗？”他叫道。他把报纸高高举起来，好让大家看到
大标题。大标题写着：
旺卡工厂终于要为几位幸运儿开放了
5 The Golden Tickets
5 The Golden Tickets
‘You mean people are actually going to be allowed to go inside the factory?’ cried
Grandpa Joe. ‘Read us what it says - quickly!’
‘All right,’ said Mr Bucket, smoothing out the newspaper. ‘Listen.’
Evening Bulletin
Mr Willy Wonka, the confectionery genius whom nobody has seen for the last tenyears, sent
out the following notice today:
I, Willy Wonka, have decided to allow five children - just five, mind you, and no
more - to visit my factory this year. These lucky five will be shown around
personally by me, and they will be allowed to see all the secrets and the magic of
my factory. Then, at the end of the tour, as a special present, all of them will be
given enough chocolates and sweets to last them for the rest of their lives! So
watch out for the Golden Tickets! Five Golden Tickets have beenprinted on golden
paper, and these five Golden Tickets have been hidden underneath the ordinary
wrapping paper of five ordinary bars of chocolate. These five chocolate bars may
be anywhere - in any shop in any street in any town in any country in the world -
upon any counter where Wonka’s Sweets are sold. And the five lucky finders of
these five Golden Tickets are the only ones who will be allowed to visit my factory
and see what it’s like now inside! Good luck to you all, and happy hunting!
(Signed Willy Wonka.)
‘The man’s dotty!’ muttered Grandma Josephine.
‘He’s brilliant!’ cried Grandpa Joe. ‘He’s a magician! Just imagine what will happen
now! The whole world will be searching for those Golden Tickets! Everyone will be
buying Wonka’s chocolate bars in the hope of finding one! He’ll sell more than ever
before! Oh, how exciting it would be to find one!’
‘And all the chocolate and sweets that you could eat for the rest of your life - free!’
said Grandpa George. ‘Just imagine that!’
‘They’d have to deliver them in a truck!’ said Grandma Georgina.
‘It makes me quite ill to think of it,’ said Grandma Josephine.
‘Nonsense!’ cried Grandpa Joe. ‘Wouldn’t it be something, Charlie, to open a bar of
chocolate and see a Golden Ticket glistening inside!’
‘It certainly would, Grandpa. But there isn’t a hope,’ Charlie said sadly. ‘I only get one
bar a year.’
‘You never know, darling,’ said Grandma Georgina. ‘It’s your birthday next week. You
have as much chance as anybody else.’
‘I’m afraid that simply isn’t true,’ said Grandpa George. ‘The kids who are going to
find the Golden Tickets are the ones who can afford to buy bars of chocolate every day.
Our Charlie gets only one a year. There isn’t a hope.’
5　金奖券
5　金奖券
“你是说真的让人进入这家工厂了吗？”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“把报上写的念给我们听听，快
点！”
“好的，”巴克特先生说着把报纸摊开，“你们听着。”
威利•旺卡先生——近十年来没有人见过的糖果业奇才，今天发出如下通告：
我，威利•旺卡，决定允许五名小朋友——注意，只限五名，一名不多——今年来参观我
的工厂。这五名幸运儿将由我亲自陪同参观全厂，他们将被允许看到我这工厂的全部秘密和
魔法。在参观结束时，作为特殊礼物，他们每人可以得到足够吃一辈子的巧克力糖和其他糖
果！因此，请注意金奖券！五张金奖券已用金纸印好，分别藏在五块普通的巧克力糖的包糖
纸里。这五块巧克力糖可以在任何地方——世界上任何国家的任何城镇、任何街道、任何商
店中出售旺卡糖果的任何一个柜台买到。只有这五张金奖券的五位幸运得主才能参观我的工
厂，看到厂内现在是什么样子！
祝大家好运，快快活活地找到奖券！
威利•旺卡（签名）
“这家伙真怪！”约瑟芬奶奶喃喃自语。
“他真高明！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“他是一位魔法师！只要想想，这样一来会有什么事情发
生！全世界都要寻找这几张金奖券！每个人都要买旺卡的巧克力糖，希望能找到一张金奖
券！那么，他就要比先前卖得更多！噢，能找到一张，那该叫人多么高兴啊！”
“还有可以吃一辈子的巧克力糖和其他糖果——免费的！”乔治姥爷说，“想想吧！”
“这么多，要用货车运送了！”乔治娜姥姥说。
“想到这件事就叫我作呕。”约瑟芬奶奶说。
“胡说！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“打开一块巧克力糖，看到一张金奖券在里面闪闪发光，这就
是幸运，不是吗，查理？”
“当然是的，爷爷。但是一点儿希望也没有，”查理难过地说，“一年我只能得到一块巧克
力糖。”
“说不定的，小宝贝，”乔治娜姥姥说，“下星期就是你的生日了，你的机会和其他人一样
多。”
“我怕根本不是那么回事，”乔治姥爷说，“找金奖券的都是每天买得起巧克力糖的孩子。
我们的查理一年才有一块，一点儿希望也没有。”
6 The First Two Finders
6 The First Two Finders
The very next day, the first Golden Ticket was found. The finder was a boy called
Augustus Gloop, and Mr Bucket’s evening newspaper carried a large picture of him on
the front page. The picture showed a nine-year-old boy who was so enormously fat he
looked as though he had been blown up with a powerful pump. Great flabby folds of fat
bulged out from every part of his body, and his face was like a monstrous ball of dough
with two small greedy curranty eyes peering out upon the world. The town in which
Augustus Gloop lived, the newspaper said, had gone wild with excitement over their
hero. Flags were flying from all the windows, children had been given a holiday from
school, and a parade was being organized in honour of the famous youth.
‘I just knew Augustus would find a Golden Ticket,’ his mother had told the
newspapermen. ‘He eats so many bars of chocolate a day that it was almost impossible for
him not to find one. Eating is his hobby, you know. That’s all he’s interested in. But still,
that’s better than being a hooligan and shooting off zip guns and things like that in his
spare time, isn’t it? And what I always say is, he wouldn’t go on eating like he does
unless he needed nourishment, would he? It’s all vitamins, anyway. What a thrill it will be
for him to visit Mr Wonka’s marvellous factory! We’re just as proud as anything!’
‘What a revolting woman,’ said Grandma Josephine.
‘And what a repulsive boy,’ said Grandma Georgina.
‘Only four Golden Tickets left,’ said Grandpa George. ‘I wonder who’ll get those.’
And now the whole country, indeed, the whole world, seemed suddenly to be caught
up in a mad chocolate-buying spree, everybody searching frantically for those precious
remaining tickets. Fully grown women were seen going into sweet shops and buying ten
Wonka bars at a time, then tearing off the wrappers on the spot and peering eagerly
underneath for a glint of golden paper. Children were taking hammers and smashing
their piggy banks and running out to the shops with handfuls of money. In one city, a
famous gangster robbed a bank of a thousand pounds and spent the whole lot on Wonka
bars that same afternoon. And when the police entered his house to arrest him, they
found him sitting on the floor amidst mountains of chocolate, ripping off the wrappers
with the blade of a long dagger. In far- off Russia, a woman called Charlotte Russe
claimed to have found the second ticket, but it turned out to be a clever fake. The
famous English scientist, Professor Foulbody, invented a machine which would tell you
at once, without opening the wrapper of a bar of chocolate, whether or not there was a
Golden Ticket hidden underneath it. The machine had a mechanical arm that shot out
with tremendous force and grabbed hold of anything that had the slightest bit of gold
inside it, and for a moment, it looked like the answer to everything. But unfortunately,
while the Professor was showing off the machine to the public at the sweet counter of a
large department store, the mechanical arm shot out and made a grab for the gold filling
in the back tooth of a duchess who was standing near by. There was an ugly scene, and
the machine was smashed by the crowd.
Suddenly, on the day before Charlie Bucket’s birthday, the newspapers announced
that the second Golden Ticket had been found. The lucky person was a small girl called
Veruca Salt who lived with her rich parents in a great city far away. Once again Mr
Bucket’s evening newspaper carried a big picture of the finder. She was sitting between
her beaming father and mother in the living room of their house, waving the Golden
Ticket above her head, and grinning from ear to ear.
Veruca’s father, Mr Salt, had eagerly explained to the newspapermen exactly how the
ticket was found. ‘You see, boys,’ he had said, ‘as soon as my little girl told me that she
simply had to have one of those Golden Tickets, I went out into the town and started
buying up all the Wonka bars I could lay my hands on. Thousands of them, I must have
bought. Hundreds of thousands! Then I had them loaded on to trucks and sent directly to
my own factory. I’m in the peanut business, you see, and I’ve got about a hundred
women working for me over at my place, shelling peanuts for roasting and salting.
That’s what they do all day long, those women, they sit there shelling peanuts. So I says
to them, “Okay, girls,” I says, “from now on, you can stop shelling peanuts and start
shelling the wrappers off these chocolate bars instead!” And they did. I had every worker
in the place yanking the paper off those bars of chocolate full speed ahead from morning
till night.
‘But three days went by, and we had no luck. Oh, it was terrible! My little Veruca got
more and more upset each day, and every time I went home she would scream at me,
“Where’s my Golden Ticket! I want my Golden Ticket!” And she would lie for hours on the
floor, kicking and yelling in the most disturbing way. Well, I just hated to see my little
girl feeling unhappy like that, so I vowed I would keep up the search until I’d got her
what she wanted. Then suddenly… on the evening of the fourth day, one of my women
workers yelled, “I’ve got it! A Golden Ticket!” And I said, “Give it to me, quick!” and she
did, and I rushed it home and gave it to my darling Veruca, and now she’s all smiles, and
we have a happy home once again.’
‘That’s even worse than the fat boy,’ said Grandma Josephine.
‘She needs a really good spanking,’ said Grandma Georgina.
‘I don’t think the girl’s father played it quite fair, Grandpa, do you?’ Charlie
murmured.
‘He spoils her,’ Grandpa Joe said. ‘And no good can ever come from spoiling a child
like that, Charlie, you mark my words.’
‘Come to bed, my darling,’ said Charlie’s mother. ‘Tomorrow’s your birthday, don’t
forget that, so I expect you’ll be up early to open your present.’
‘A Wonka chocolate bar!’ cried Charlie. ‘It is a Wonka bar, isn’t it?’
‘Yes, my love,’ his mother said. ‘Of course it is.’
‘Oh, wouldn’t it be wonderful if I found the third Golden Ticket inside it?’ Charlie
said.
‘Bring it in here when you get it,’ Grandpa Joe said. ‘Then we can all watch you
taking off the wrapper.’
6　金奖券的头两名得主
6　金奖券的头两名得主
就在第二天，第一张金奖券被找到了。得主是个男孩，叫奥古斯塔斯•格卢普，巴克特先
生带回来的晚报上，头版就印着他的大幅照片。照片上是个九岁男孩，胖得像用强力打气筒
打足了气一样。他浑身都是鼓出来的松软肥肉，脸像一个大面团，上面有两只小葡萄干似的
贪婪眼睛窥视着外面的世界。报上说，奥古斯塔斯•格卢普所居住的市镇由于出了这位英雄而
大喜若狂。所有的窗户飘扬着旗帜，小学生放假一天，还要举行大游行来祝贺这个出了名的
小朋友。
“我就知道奥古斯塔斯会找到一张金奖券，”他的妈妈告诉新闻记者，“他一天吃那么多块
巧克力糖，要他不找到一张根本不可能。你们要知道，吃是他的嗜好。这是他唯一的乐趣。
不过这样总胜过做小流氓，闲下来开手枪之类，不是吗？我一直说，如果不是需要营养，他
是不会像现在这样吃的，对不对？无论如何，吃进去的全是维生素。参观旺卡先生那家奇异
工厂对他来说将是多么刺激啊！我们感到无比自豪！”
“真是一个叫人恶心的女人。”约瑟芬奶奶说。
“真是一个叫人讨厌的孩子。”乔治娜姥姥说。
“现在只剩下四张金奖券了，”乔治姥爷说，“不知道谁会找到它们。”
现在全国，说实在的，全世界好像一下子掀起了购买巧克力糖的热潮，人人在发狂似的
寻找余下的四张珍贵奖券。可以看到女士走进糖果店，一次买下十块旺卡工厂出品的巧克力
糖，当场撕掉包糖纸，焦急地看里面有没有闪闪发光的金纸。孩子们拿起锤子打破他们的储
蓄罐，拿着一把把零钱跑到商店去。在某个城市里，一个出名的大盗走进一家银行抢劫了一
千英镑，当天下午全用来买了旺卡工厂出品的巧克力糖。当警察走进他家逮捕他的时候，发
现他正坐在地板上，周围巧克力糖堆积如山，他正用一把长匕首的刀刃在剥包糖纸。远在俄
国，一个叫夏洛特•俄罗斯的女人声称已经找到第二张奖券，但是那只是一张伪造得很巧妙的
假奖券。英国著名科学家福尔博迪教授发明了一种仪器，它不用撕开巧克力糖的包糖纸就能
马上告诉你里面是不是藏着金奖券。这仪器有一条机械臂，能猛力弹出来，抓住任何只含一
点点金子的东西。这仪器一时好像能解决一切问题了。不过很可惜，当教授在一家大百货商
店的糖果柜台前当众炫耀他的仪器时，它的机械臂一下子弹了出来，去抓旁边站着的一位公
爵夫人嘴里镶的金牙。结果大出洋相，仪器被观众当场捣毁了。
忽然，就在查理•巴克特过生日的前一天，报上宣布说第二张金奖券找到了。这次幸运儿
是个小女孩，名字叫维鲁卡•索尔特，她和富有的爸爸妈妈住在很远的一座大城市里。巴克特
先生带回家的晚报上又刊登了得主的一幅大照片。她在他们家的客厅里，坐在满面红光的爸
爸妈妈中间，把金奖券高举在头顶上挥来挥去，咧着嘴大笑。
维鲁卡的爸爸索尔特先生起劲地告诉记者这张奖券到底是怎么找到的。“你们知道吗？朋
友们，”他说，“我的小女儿一对我说一定要得到一张金奖券，我就进城把我能买到的所有旺
卡工厂出品的巧克力糖全部买了下来。我准是买了成千上万块，几十万块！接着我用几辆货
车装上，直接运到我自己的工厂。你们知道，我是做盐烤花生米生意的，我的工厂有上百个
女工，整天在剥花生做盐烤花生米。她们整天就做这件事，坐在那里剥花生。于是我对她们
说：‘好了，姑娘们，我说，从现在起你们暂时停止剥花生，动手剥掉这些巧克力糖的包糖纸
吧！’她们照办了。我让每个女工坐在她的位子上，从早到晚用最快的速度撕掉一块块巧克力
糖的包糖纸。
“但是三天过去了，我们还没有如愿以偿。噢，太可怕了！我的小维鲁卡一天比一天难
过，每次我回家她就对着我尖声大叫：‘我的金奖券在哪里？我要我的金奖券！’她会在地板上
躺上几个小时，用最吓人的样子又踢又叫，吵个没完。唉，我就怕看到我的小女儿这么难
过，于是我发誓要继续找，直到给她找到她所要的东西为止。接着，忽然之间……就在第四
天的晚上，我的一个女工大叫起来：‘我找到了！一张金奖券！’我说：‘快给我！’她把奖券交
给我，我拿了就赶回家，把它交给我的小宝贝维鲁卡。现在她又满脸笑容了，我们重新有了
一个快乐的家庭。”
“她比那个胖男孩还要坏。”约瑟芬奶奶说。
“她真得好好挨一顿揍。”乔治娜姥姥说。
“我认为那女孩的爸爸做得不够公正。爷爷，你说呢？”查理喃喃地说。
“他宠坏了她，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“这样宠坏一个孩子不会有好结果的，查理，你记住我的
话好了。”
“睡觉去吧，我的小宝贝，”查理的妈妈说，“明天是你的生日，别忘了，我希望你早点起
来打开你的礼物。”
“一块旺卡的巧克力糖！”查理叫道，“是一块旺卡的巧克力糖，对吗？”
“是的，我的小心肝，”他的妈妈说，“当然是的。”
“噢，如果我在糖里找到第三张金奖券，那不是好极了吗？”查理说。
“你拿到巧克力糖就把它拿到这里来，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“那么我们可以一起看着你把包糖
纸剥下来。”
7 Charlie’s Birthday
7 Charlie’s Birthday
‘Happy birthday!’ cried the four old grandparents, as Charlie came into their room early
the next morning.
Charlie smiled nervously and sat down on the edge of the bed. He was holding his
present, his only present, very carefully in his two hands. WONKA’S WHIPPLE-
SCRUMPTIOUS FUDGEMALLOW DELIGHT, it said on the wrapper.
The four old people, two at either end of the bed, propped themselves up on their
pillows and stared with anxious eyes at the bar of chocolate in Charlie’s hands.
Mr and Mrs Bucket came in and stood at the foot of the bed, watching Charlie.
The room became silent. Everybody was waiting now for Charlie to start opening his
present. Charlie looked down at the bar of chocolate. He ran his fingers slowly back and
forth along the length of it, stroking it lovingly, and the shiny paper wrapper made little
sharp crackly noises in the quiet room.
Then Mrs Bucket said gently, ‘You mustn’t be too disappointed, my darling, if you
don’t find what you’re looking for underneath that wrapper. You really can’t expect to
be as lucky as all that.’
‘She’s quite right,’ Mr Bucket said.
Charlie didn’t say anything.
‘After all,’ Grandma Josephine said, ‘in the whole wide world there are only three
tickets left to be found.’
‘The thing to remember,’ Grandma Georgina said, ‘is that whatever happens, you’ll
still have the bar of chocolate.’
‘Wonka’s Whipple-Scrumptious Fudgemallow Delight!’ cried Grandpa George. ‘It’s the
best of them all! You’ll just love it!’
‘Yes,’ Charlie whispered. ‘I know.’
‘Just forget all about those Golden Tickets and enjoy the chocolate,’ Grandpa Joe said.
‘Why don’t you do that?’
They all knew it was ridiculous to expect this one poor little bar of chocolate to have
a magic ticket inside it, and they were trying as gently and as kindly as they could to
prepare Charlie for the disappointment. But there was one other thing that the grown-
ups also knew, and it was this: that however small the chance might be of striking lucky,
the chance was there.
The chance had to be there.
This particular bar of chocolate had as much chance as any other of having a Golden
Ticket.
And that was why all the grandparents and parents in the room were actually just as
tense and excited as Charlie was, although they were pretending to be very calm.
‘You’d better go ahead and open it up, or you’ll be late for school,’ Grandpa Joe said.
‘You might as well get it over with,’ Grandpa George said.
‘Open it, my dear,’ Grandma Georgina said. ‘Please open it. You’re making me jumpy.’
Very slowly, Charlie’s fingers began to tear open one small corner of the wrapping
paper.
The old people in the bed all leaned forward, craning their scraggy necks.
Then suddenly, as though he couldn’t bear the suspense any longer, Charlie tore the
wrapper right down the middle… and on to his lap, there fell… a light-brown creamy-
coloured bar of chocolate.
There was no sign of a Golden Ticket anywhere.
‘Well - that’s that!’ said Grandpa Joe brightly. ‘It’s just what we expected.’
Charlie looked up. Four kind old faces were watching him intently from the bed. He
smiled at them, a small sad smile, and then he shrugged his shoulders and picked up the
chocolate bar and held it out to his mother, and said, ‘Here, Mother, have a bit. We’ll
share it. I want everybody to taste it.’
‘Certainly not!’ his mother said.
And the others all cried, ‘No, no! We wouldn’t dream of it! It’s all yours!’
‘Please,’ begged Charlie, turning round and offering it to Grandpa Joe.
But neither he nor anyone else would take even a tiny bit.
‘It’s time to go to school, my darling,’ Mrs Bucket said, putting an arm around
Charlie’s skinny shoulders. ‘Come on, or you’ll be late.’
7　查理的生日
　　7　查理的生日
　　“祝你生日快乐！”第二天一早，查理一走进四位老人家的房间，他们就喊道。
　　查理紧张地微笑着，在床边坐下。他双手小心翼翼地拿着他的礼物——他唯一的礼物。
　　包糖纸上写着：
　　旺卡的一流开心牛奶巧克力软糖
　　四位老人家坐在床边，每头两位，靠着他们的枕头，用焦急的眼神盯住查理手中那块巧克力糖。
　　巴克特先生和巴克特太太走进来，站在床尾看着查理。
　　房间里寂静无声。现在每个人都在等着查理动手打开他的礼物。查理低下头看着那块巧克力糖。他的手指慢慢地来回滑动，心爱地抚摸着它。闪亮的包糖纸在静悄悄的房间里发出很轻的清脆的响声。
　　这时候，巴克特太太温柔地说：“我的小宝贝，如果你在那包糖纸里找不到你要找的东西，也千万不要太失望啊！你不能期望自己会那么幸运。”
　　“你妈妈说得完全对。”巴克特先生说。
　　查理没有做声。
　　“反正，”约瑟芬奶奶说，“在这个广阔的世界里，要找的奖券总共只剩下那么三张。”
　　“你要记住，”乔治娜姥姥说，“不管怎么样，你还是得到了一块巧克力糖。”
　　“旺卡的一流开心牛奶巧克力软糖，”乔治姥爷叫道，“这是所有巧克力糖中最好的！你准爱吃！”
　　“是的，”查理轻轻地说，“我知道。”
　　“就忘掉什么金奖券，好好吃巧克力糖吧，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“你为什么不这样做呢？”
　　他们全都明白，希望这一小块可怜的巧克力糖里有一张金奖券是荒唐的。他们试图尽可能温柔和慈祥地使查理做好失望的准备。但还有一件事这些大人也知道，这件事就是：不管机会多么少，但机会还是有的。
　　机会应该是有的。这一块巧克力糖和任何一块巧克力糖一样，也有藏着一张金奖券的同等机会。
　　正因为这个缘故，房间里的爷爷、奶奶、姥爷、姥姥、爸爸和妈妈虽然装得非常镇静，实际上全跟查理一样紧张和激动。
　　“你最好还是动手把它打开，不然你上学要迟到了。”约瑟夫爷爷说。
　　“你还来得及把它吃掉。”乔治姥爷说。
　　“打开它吧，我亲爱的，”乔治娜姥姥说，“请你打开它吧。你弄得我胆战心惊了。”
　　查理开始用手指慢慢地撕开包装纸的一小角。
　　床上的四位老人家全把身子靠向前，伸长他们的瘦脖子。
　　忽然之间，查理像是再也忍不住这样猜想下去了，把包糖纸一下子撕到半当中……在他的膝盖上落下了……一块淡棕奶油色的巧克力糖。
　　里面连金奖券的影子也没有。
　　“对了——就是这样！”约瑟夫爷爷轻松地说，“正是我们所料想的。”
　　查理抬起眼睛。床上四张慈祥的脸紧张地看着他。查理向他们微笑——难过地微微一笑。接着他耸耸肩，捡起那块巧克力糖，把它递给他的妈妈说：“吃吧，妈妈，吃一口。我们把它分了吃。我要每个人都尝一尝。”
　　“当然不吃！”他的妈妈说。
　　其他人全叫起来：“不，不！我们根本不想尝它！这块巧克力糖全是你的！”
　　“请尝尝吧。”查理转过身，把它递给约瑟夫爷爷。
　　但是约瑟夫爷爷也好，其他人也好，连小小的一口都不肯尝。
　　“该去上学了，我的宝贝，”巴克特太太用一只手臂搂住查理瘦削的双肩说，“去吧，不然你要迟到了。”
8 Two More Golden Tickets Found
8 Two More Golden Tickets Found
That evening, Mr Bucket’s newspaper announced the finding of not only the third
Golden Ticket, but the fourth as well. TWO GOLDEN TICKETS FOUND TODAY,
screamed the headlines. ONLY ONE MORE LEFT.
‘All right,’ said Grandpa Joe, when the whole family was gathered in the old people’s
room after supper, ‘let’s hear who found them.’
‘The third ticket,’ read Mr Bucket, holding the newspaper up close to his face because
his eyes were bad and he couldn’t afford glasses, ‘the third ticket was found by a Miss
Violet Beauregarde. There was great excitement in the Beauregarde household when our
reporter arrived to interview the lucky young lady - cameras were clicking and
flashbulbs were flashing and people were pushing and jostling and trying to get a bit
closer to the famous girl. And the famous girl was standing on a chair in the living room
waving the Golden Ticket madly at arm’s length as though she were flagging a taxi. She
was talking very fast and very loudly to everyone, but it was not easy to hear all that she
said because she was chewing so ferociously upon a piece of gum at the same time.
‘ “I’m a gum chewer, normally,” she shouted, “but when I heard about these ticket
things of Mr Wonka’s, I gave up gum and started on chocolate bars in the hope of
striking lucky. Now, of course, I’m back on gum. I just adore gum. I can’t do without it. I
munch it all day long except for a few minutes at mealtimes when I take it out and stick
it behind my ear for safekeeping. To tell you the truth, I simply wouldn’t feel comfortable
if I didn’t have that little wedge of gum to chew on every moment of the day, I really
wouldn’t. My mother says it’s not ladylike and it looks ugly to see a girl’s jaws going up
and down like mine do all the time, but I don’t agree. And who’s she to criticize,
anyway, because if you ask me, I’d say that her jaws are going up and down almost as
much as mine are just from yelling at me every minute of the day.”
‘ “Now, Violet,” Mrs Beauregarde said from a far corner of the room where she was
standing on the piano to avoid being trampled by the mob.
‘ “All right, Mother, keep your hair on!” Miss Beauregarde shouted. “And now,” she
went on, turning to the reporters again, “it may interest you to know that this piece of
gum I’m chewing right at this moment is one I’ve been working on for over three months
solid. That’s a record, that is. It’s beaten the record held by my best friend, Miss Cornelia
Prinzmetel. And was she furious! It’s my most treasured possession now, this piece of
gum is. At night-time, I just stick it on the end of the bedpost, and it’s as good as ever in
the mornings -a bit hard at first, maybe, but it soon softens up again after I’ve given it a
few good chews. Before I started chewing for the world record, I used to change my
piece of gum once a day. I used to do it in our lift on the way home from school. Why
the lift? Because I liked sticking the gooey piece that I’d just finished with on to one of
the control buttons. Then the next person who came along and pressed the button got
my old gum on the end of his or her finger. Ha-ha! And what a racket they kicked up,
some of them. You get the best results with women who have expensive gloves on. Oh
yes, I’m thrilled to be going to Mr Wonka’s factory. And I understand that afterwards
he’s going to give me enough gum to last me for the rest of my whole life. Whoopee!
Hooray!” ’
‘Beastly girl,’ said Grandma Josephine.
‘Despicable!’ said Grandma Georgina. ‘She’ll come to a sticky end one day, chewing all
that gum, you see if she doesn’t.’
‘And who got the fourth Golden Ticket?’ Charlie asked.
‘Now, let me see,’ said Mr Bucket, peering at the newspaper again. ‘Ah yes, here we
are. The fourth Golden Ticket,’ he read, ‘was found by a boy called Mike Teavee.’
‘Another bad lot, I’ll be bound,’ muttered Grandma Josephine.
‘Don’t interrupt, Grandma,’ said Mrs Bucket.
‘The Teavee household,’ said Mr Bucket, going on with his reading, ‘was crammed,
like all the others, with excited visitors when our reporter arrived, but young Mike
Teavee, the lucky winner, seemed extremely annoyed by the whole business. “Can’t you
fools see I’m watching television?” he said angrily. “I wish you wouldn’t interrupt!”
‘The nine-year-old boy was seated before an enormous television set, with his eyes
glued to the screen, and he was watching a film in which one bunch of gangsters was
shooting up another bunch of gangsters with machine guns. Mike Teavee himself had no
less than eighteen toy pistols of various sizes hanging from belts around his body, and
every now and again he would leap up into the air and fire off half a dozen rounds from
one or another of these weapons.
‘ “Quiet!” he shouted, when someone tried to ask him a question. “Didn’t I tell you not
to interrupt! This show’s an absolute whiz-banger! It’s terrific! I watch it every day. I
watch all of them every day, even the rotten ones, where there’s no shooting. I like the
gangsters best. They’re terrific, those gangsters! Especially when they start pumping
each other full of lead, or flashing the old stilettos, or giving each other the one-two-
three with their knuckledusters! Gosh, what wouldn’t I give to be doing that myself! It’s
the life, I tell you! It’s terrific!” ’
‘That’s quite enough!’ snapped Grandma Josephine. ‘I can’t bear to listen to it!’
‘Nor me,’ said Grandma Georgina. ‘Do all children behave like this nowadays - like
these brats we’ve been hearing about?’
‘Of course not,’ said Mr Bucket, smiling at the old lady in the bed. ‘Some do, of course.
In fact, quite a lot of them do. But not all.’
‘And now there’s only one ticket left!’ said Grandpa George.
‘Quite so,’ sniffed Grandma Georgina. ‘And just as sure as I’ll be having cabbage soup
for supper tomorrow, that ticket’ll go to some nasty little beast who doesn’t deserve it!’
8　又有两张金奖券找到了
8　又有两张金奖券找到了
那天晚上，巴克特先生带回家的晚报宣布不但第三张金奖券，连第四张金奖券也找到
了。大标题触目惊心地写着：
两张金奖券今天已经找到，只剩一张了！
“好吧，”晚餐后当全家聚在四位老人家的房间里时，约瑟夫爷爷说，“让我们来听听是谁
找到了它们。”
“第三张奖券，”巴克特先生念道，他把报纸凑到脸前，因为他的视力不好，又买不起眼
镜戴，“第三张奖券由维奥莉特•博雷加德小姐找到。当我们的记者来到博雷加德家访问这位幸
运的年轻小姐时，她家正热闹非凡——摄影机咔嚓咔嚓地响，闪光灯闪个不停，人们又推又
搡，想更靠近这位出了名的小姐一点儿。这位出了名的小姐正站在客厅里的一把椅子上，举
起手臂拼命地挥动那张金奖券，好像在挥手叫出租汽车似的。她又快又响地对大家说话，但
是要听清楚她所有的话实在不容易，因为她同时在拼命地大嚼一片口香糖。
“‘其实我爱嚼口香糖，’她大叫着说，‘但是一听说旺卡先生的这些奖券，我就不嚼口香
糖，开始改吃巧克力糖了，希望能幸运地得到奖券。现在，我当然回过头来吃我的口香糖。
我就是热爱口香糖。我不能没有它。我整天嚼口香糖，除了吃饭时的几分钟我会把它从嘴里
拿出来，为了安全地放好，我把它贴在我的耳朵后面。老实告诉你们吧，如果一天里有一分
钟不嚼口香糖，我简直就浑身不舒服，实在不舒服。我妈妈说，看见一个姑娘像我这样整天
上下不停地动着上下颌，着实不像一位小姐，太难看了，但是我不同意这话。她算什么，竟
然批评起我来了。如果你们问我，我可以告诉你们，她的上下颌几乎就像我的一样，整天上
下不停地动，她每分钟都在对我大叫大嚷。’
“‘好了，维奥莉特。’博雷加德太太说。她在房间远远的一角，正站在钢琴上面，怕被人
群踩着。
“‘好吧，妈妈，不要发脾气！’博雷加德小姐叫道。‘现在，’她转向记者们说，‘你们也许
有兴趣知道，我正在嚼的这片口香糖，我已经嚼了整整三个月。这是一个记录，它打破了我
最好的朋友康妮莉亚•普林茨梅特尔小姐所保持的记录。她气坏了！现在这片口香糖是我最珍
惜的宝贝。夜里我把它贴在床柱上，到早晨又像原来一样好——起先也许硬一点儿，但用力
嚼几下就变软了。在我准备嚼出世界记录以前，我总是每天换一片口香糖，也总是放学回家
时在电梯里换。为什么在电梯里换呢？因为我喜欢把刚嚼完时黏糊糊的口香糖贴在电梯的按
钮上。等到下一个人来乘电梯，一按按钮，我的旧口香糖就粘在他——男的或者女的——的
手指上了。哈哈！有些人会大叫大嚷。碰到戴名贵手套的女人效果最好。噢，对的，要到旺
卡先生的工厂去我很高兴。我知道他接下来还要送给我够吃一辈子的口香糖。好啊！万
岁！’”
“讨厌的小姑娘。”约瑟芬奶奶说。
“真下流！”乔治娜姥姥说，“嚼那么多口香糖，她有一天也会变得黏糊糊的，不变才怪
呢！”
“谁拿到第四张金奖券了？”查理问道。
“让我看看。”巴克特先生说着又看报纸。“啊，对了，在这里。第四张金奖券，”他念
道，“是一个叫迈克•蒂维的男孩找到的。”
“我敢说，又是一个坏家伙。”约瑟芬奶奶咕哝道。
“奶奶，别打断他的话。”巴克特太太说。
“我们的记者来到蒂维家时，”巴克特先生念下去，“他家跟其他几家一样挤满了兴奋的来
访者，但幸运的奖券得主小迈克•蒂维似乎给整件事情惹烦了。‘你们这些傻瓜没有看到我正在
看电视吗？’他生气地说，‘我希望你们别打扰我！’
“这个九岁的男孩正坐在一台大电视机前两眼紧紧地盯住荧光屏，在看两帮匪徒用机关枪
对射的电影。迈克•蒂维身上的几根背带挂满了大小不同的玩具枪，不下十八支。他不时跳起
来，用这支枪或者那支枪嗒嗒嗒开六七枪。
“‘别响！’有人想向他提问他就大叫，‘我不是告诉过你们不要打扰我吗！这个节目真是呱
呱叫！太棒了，我每天都看。我每天所有的节目都看，连不开枪的戆节目也看。我最喜欢强
盗。那些强盗真了不起！特别是碰到他们互相噼噼啪啪开枪，亮出旧匕首，或者快速地用铜
指套相击的时候！唉，如果我也能这样干就好了！告诉你们，这才是生活！真棒！’”
“够了，够了！”约瑟芬奶奶厉声说，“听这种话我简直受不了！”
“我也一样，”乔治娜姥姥说，“难道现今所有的孩子都这样，像我们刚才听到的那些小坏
蛋一样吗？”
“当然不是，”巴克特先生对床上这位老太太微笑着说，“自然，有些孩子是这样，事实上
有不少孩子是这样，但不是所有的孩子都这样。”
“现在只剩下一张奖券了！”乔治姥爷说。
“一点儿不错，”乔治娜姥姥深深吸了一口气，“就像我明天晚餐要吃卷心菜汤一样千真万
确，那张奖券一准又要落到一个不配得到它的小流氓手里！”
9 Grandpa Joe Takes a Gamble
9 Grandpa Joe Takes a Gamble
The next day, when Charlie came home from school and went in to see his grandparents,
he found that only Grandpa Joe was awake. The other three were all snoring loudly.
‘Ssshh!’ whispered Grandpa Joe, and he beckoned Charlie to come closer. Charlie
tiptoed over and stood beside the bed. The old man gave Charlie a sly grin, and then he
started rummaging under his pillow with one hand; and when the hand came out again,
there was an ancient leather purse clutched in the fingers. Under cover of the
bedclothes, the old man opened the purse and tipped it upside down. Out fell a single
silver sixpence. ‘It’s my secret hoard,’ he whispered. ‘The others don’t know I’ve got it.
And now, you and I are going to have one more fling at finding that last ticket. How
about it, eh? But you’ll have to help me.’
‘Are you sure you want to spend your money on that, Grandpa?’ Charlie whispered.
‘Of course I’m sure!’ spluttered the old man excitedly. ‘Don’t stand there arguing! I’m
as keen as you are to find that ticket! Here - take the money and run down the street to
the nearest shop and buy the first Wonka bar you see and bring it straight back to me,
and we’ll open it together.’
Charlie took the little silver coin, and slipped quickly out of the room. In five minutes,
he was back.
‘Have you got it?’ whispered Grandpa Joe, his eyes shining with excitement.
Charlie nodded and held out the bar of chocolate. WONKA’S NUTTY CRUNCH
SURPRISE, it said on the wrapper.
‘Good!’ the old man whispered, sitting up in the bed and rubbing his hands. ‘Now -
come over here and sit close to me and we’ll open it together. Are you ready?’
‘Yes,’ Charlie said. ‘I’m ready.’
‘All right. You tear off the first bit.’
‘No,’ Charlie said, ‘you paid for it. You do it all.’
The old man’s fingers were trembling most terribly as they fumbled with the wrapper.
‘We don’t have a hope, really,’ he whispered, giggling a bit. ‘You do know we don’t have
a hope, don’t you?’
‘Yes,’ Charlie said. ‘I know that.’
They looked at each other, and both started giggling nervously.
‘Mind you,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘there is just that tiny chance that it might be the one,
don’t you agree?’
‘Yes,’ Charlie said. ‘Of course. Why don’t you open it, Grandpa?’
‘All in good time, my boy, all in good time. Which end do you think I ought to open
first?’
‘That corner. The one furthest from you. Just tear off a tiny bit, but not quite enough
for us to see anything.’
‘Like that?’ said the old man.
‘Yes. Now a little bit more.’
‘You finish it,’ said Grandpa Joe. ‘I’m too nervous.’
‘No, Grandpa. You must do it yourself.’
‘Very well, then. Here goes.’ He tore off the wrapper.
They both stared at what lay underneath. It was a bar of chocolate - nothing more.
All at once, they both saw the funny side of the whole thing, and they burst into peals
of laughter.
‘What on earth’s going on!’ cried Grandma Josephine, waking up suddenly.
‘Nothing,’ said Grandpa Joe. ‘You go on back to sleep.’
9　约瑟夫爷爷孤注一掷
9　约瑟夫爷爷孤注一掷
第二天，查理放学回家进去看他的祖父、祖母和外祖父、外祖母，发觉只有约瑟夫爷爷
一个人醒着，其他三位老人家全在大声打呼噜。
“嘘嘘嘘！”约瑟夫爷爷低声说，招手叫查理走近一点儿。查理踮起脚走到他的床边。爷
爷对查理笑了笑，接着用一只手在枕头底下摸索。当他重新把手伸出来时，手指抓住一个古
老的皮钱包。爷爷在被单底下打开钱包，把它倒过来。落下了一枚六便士银币。“这是我的私
房钱，”他低声说，“其他人都不知道我有这枚银币。现在，你和我多了一个机会找到那最后
一张奖券。怎么样，嗯？不过你要帮我的忙。”
“你真的要把这钱花在奖券上面吗，爷爷？”查理悄悄地问道。
“当然是真的！”老人家激动得唾沫横飞，“不要站在这里争论了！我和你一样急于要找到
那张奖券！来，把钱拿去，跑到街上最近的一家商店买你看到的第一块旺卡巧克力糖，立刻
拿回来给我，我们一起把它拆开。”
查理拿起那枚银币，很快地溜出房间。五分钟后他回来了。
“买到了吗？”约瑟夫爷爷低声问道，他的眼睛兴奋得发光。
查理点点头，把那块巧克力糖拿出来，包糖纸上写着：
旺卡的果仁香脆巧克力糖
“好！”老人家悄悄地说了一声，在床上坐起来，搓着手，“过来，到这里来，坐到我的身
边来，我们一起来拆开它。你准备好了吗？”
“是的，”查理说，“我准备好了。”
“那好，你先动手，撕开一点儿。”
“不，”查理说，“它是你出钱买的，由你来撕。”
当老人家的手指摸着包糖纸时，它颤抖得非常厉害。“我们绝不会有希望，”他低声说，
咯咯地笑了笑，“你知道，我们不会有希望的，对吗？”
“对，”查理说，“我知道。”
他们相互对看着，都紧张地咯咯傻笑起来。
“你听着，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“只有一丁点儿机会，可能是这一块，你这么认为吗？”
“是的，”查理说，“我也这么认为。你为什么还不拆开它呢，爷爷？”
“别急，我的孩子，别急。你认为我该先撕哪一头呢？”
“那一头，离你最远的一头。只撕开一点儿，不要撕得让我们看到里面的东西。”
“是这样撕吗？”老人家说。
“对，现在再撕一点儿。”
“你来撕完它吧，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“我太紧张了。”
“不，爷爷，你一定要自己撕。”
“那好吧！我撕了。”约瑟夫爷爷把包糖纸全部撕开来。
他们两个盯着纸里的东西看。
只有一块巧克力糖，没有别的了。
他们两个突然觉得，他们所做的整件事情非常滑稽，于是哈哈大笑起来。
“出什么事啦？”约瑟芬奶奶忽然醒过来问道。
“没什么，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“睡你的觉吧。”
10 The Family Begins to Starve
10 The Family Begins to Starve
During the next two weeks, the weather turned very cold. First came the snow. It began
very suddenly one morning just as Charlie Bucket was getting dressed for school.
Standing by the window, he saw the huge flakes drifting slowly down out of an icy sky
that was the colour of steel.
By evening, it lay four feet deep around the tiny house, and Mr Bucket had to dig a
path from the front door to the road.
After the snow, there came a freezing gale that blew for days and days without
stopping. And oh, how bitter cold it was! Everything that Charlie touched seemed to be
made of ice, and each time he stepped outside the door, the wind was like a knife on his
cheek.
Inside the house, little jets of freezing air came rushing in through the sides of the
windows and under the doors, and there was no place to go to escape them. The four old
ones lay silent and huddled in their bed, trying to keep the cold out of their bones. The
excitement over the Golden Tickets had long since been forgotten. Nobody in the family
gave a thought now to anything except the two vital problems of trying to keep warm
and trying to get enough to eat.
There is something about very cold weather that gives one an enormous appetite.
Most of us find ourselves beginning to crave rich steaming stews and hot apple pies and
all kinds of delicious warming dishes; and because we are all a great deal luckier than
we realize, we usually get what we want - or near enough. But Charlie Bucket never got
what he wanted because the family couldn’t afford it, and as the cold weather went on
and on, he became ravenously and desperately hungry. Both bars of chocolate, the
birthday one and the one Grandpa Joe had bought, had long since been nibbled away,
and all he got now were those thin, cabbagy meals three times a day.
Then all at once, the meals became even thinner.
The reason for this was that the toothpaste factory, the place where Mr Bucket
worked, suddenly went bust and had to close down. Quickly, Mr Bucket tried to get
another job. But he had no luck. In the end, the only way in which he managed to earn a
few pennies was by shovelling snow in the streets. But it wasn’t enough to buy even a
quarter of the food that seven people needed. The situation became desperate. Breakfast
was a single slice of bread for each person now, and lunch was maybe half a boiled
potato.
Slowly but surely, everybody in the house began to starve.
And every day, little Charlie Bucket, trudging
through the snow on his way to school, would have to pass Mr Willy Wonka’s giant
chocolate factory. And every day, as he came near to it, he would lift his small pointed
nose high in the air and sniff the wonderful sweet smell of melting chocolate.
Sometimes, he would stand motionless outside the gates for several minutes on end,
taking deep swallowing breaths as though he were trying to eat the smell itself.
‘That child,’ said Grandpa Joe, poking his head up from under the blanket one icy
morning, ‘that child has got to have more food. It doesn’t matter about us. We’re too old
to bother with. But a growing boy! He can’t go on like this! He’s beginning to look like a
skeleton!’
‘What can one do?’ murmured Grandma Josephine miserably. ‘He refuses to take any
of ours. I hear his mother tried to slip her own piece of bread on to his plate at breakfast
this morning, but he wouldn’t touch it. He made her take it back.’
‘He’s a fine little fellow,’ said Grandpa George. ‘He deserves better than this.’
The cruel weather went on and on.
And every day, Charlie Bucket grew thinner and thinner. His face became
frighteningly white and pinched. The skin was drawn so tightly over the cheeks that you
could see the shapes of the bones underneath. It seemed doubtful whether he could go
on much longer like this without becoming dangerously ill.
And now, very calmly, with that curious wisdom that seems to come so often to small
children in times of hardship, he began to make little changes here and there in some of
the things that he did, so as to save his strength. In the mornings, he left the house ten
minutes earlier so that he could walk slowly to school, without ever having to run. He
sat quietly in the classroom during break, resting himself, while the others rushed
outdoors and threw snowballs and wrestled in the snow. Everything he did now, he did
slowly and carefully, to prevent exhaustion.
Then one afternoon, walking back home with the icy wind in his face (and
incidentally feeling hungrier than he had ever felt before), his eye was caught suddenly
by something silvery lying in the gutter, in the snow. Charlie stepped off the kerb and
bent down to examine it. Part of it was buried under the snow, but he saw at once what
it was.
It was a fifty-pence piece!
Quickly he looked around him.
Had somebody just dropped it?
No - that was impossible because of the way part of it was buried.
Several people went hurrying past him on the pavement, their chins sunk deep in the
collars of their coats, their feet crunching in the snow. None of them was searching for
any money; none of them was taking the slightest notice of the small boy crouching in
the gutter.
Then was it his, this fifty pence?
Could he have it?
Carefully, Charlie pulled it out from under the snow. It was damp and dirty, but
otherwise perfect.
A WHOLE fifty pence!
He held it tightly between his shivering fingers, gazing down at it. It meant one thing
to him at that moment, only one thing. It meant FOOD.
Automatically, Charlie turned and began moving towards the nearest shop. It was
only ten paces away… it was a newspaper and stationery shop, the kind that sells almost
everything, including sweets and cigars… and what he would do, he whispered quickly
to himself… he would buy one luscious bar of chocolate and eat it all up, every bit of it,
right then and there… and the rest of the money he would take straight back home and
give to his mother.
10　一家人开始挨饿
10　一家人开始挨饿
接下来的两星期，天气变得非常冷。先是下雪。一天早晨它来得很突然，当时查理•巴克
特正穿衣服准备上学去。他站在窗前，看见大雪从像钢铁一样颜色的冷冰冰天空上缓缓地飘
落下来。
到傍晚，小木屋周围积起了一米多深的雪。巴克特先生只好从前门铲出一条小路通到大
路上去。
下雪以后，一连好多天寒风刮个不停。噢，多么冷啊！查理摸上去的每一样东西都像是
冰做的。每次出门，风都像刀一样刺痛他的脸。
在屋子里，一小股一小股寒气从窗缝和门缝下钻进来，简直无处可躲。四位老人家在他
们的床上默默地躺着，把身子缩作一团，以免寒风刺骨。对金奖券产生的兴奋早已被忘得干
干净净。除了保暖和吃饭这两个性命交关的问题外，家中没有一个人再去想别的事情。
严寒天气能使人的胃口特别好。碰到这种天气，大多数人都渴望吃到热气腾腾的肥美焖
肉、热苹果馅饼和各种美味的热菜。由于我们身在福中而自己还不大知道，我们想要什么总
能得到什么，或者几乎总能得到什么。但查理•巴克特想要什么从来不能如愿，因为他家里买
不起，现在天气一直冷下去，他就饿到了极点。两块巧克力糖，过生日的一块和后来约瑟夫
爷爷让他买的一块，早就一点儿一点儿吃光了，现在他能得到的就是一天三餐卷心菜稀汤。
再下来，一天三餐的卷心菜汤一下子变得更稀了。
这是因为巴克特先生工作的牙膏厂忽然破了产，只好关门。巴克特先生赶紧去找别的工
作。但是他运气不好，到最后只能在街上铲雪，挣几枚便士。这点钱甚至不够买一家七口所
需要的四分之一的食物。情况变得毫无办法了。现在早餐是每人一片面包，午餐顶多是半个
土豆。
一点儿一点儿，但毫无疑问，一家人开始挨饿了。
每天小查理•巴克特踏雪上学，必须经过威利•旺卡那家巧克力大工厂。每次走近这家工厂
时，他便高兴地抬起他的小尖鼻子去吸融化的巧克力香喷喷的气味。有时候他会在大门外一
动不动地站上几分钟，深深地呼吸，好像要把香气也吃下去似的。
“那孩子，”一个严寒的早晨，约瑟夫爷爷从毯子底下伸出头来说，“那孩子必须有更多的
食物，我们倒无所谓。我们太老了，不必管我们。但他是一个正在长大的孩子！他不能这样
下去！他现在看上去像一具骷髅！”
“有什么办法呢？”约瑟芬奶奶难过地嘟哝着，“他不肯吃我们省给他的食物。今天吃早餐
时，我听见他的妈妈要把自己的一片面包放到他的碟子里，但是他碰也不肯碰。他硬逼着妈
妈把面包拿回去。”
“他是一个好孩子，”乔治姥爷说，“他应该生活得更好。”
严寒的天气一直持续下去。
查理•巴克特一天比一天瘦。他的脸变得惨白和瘦削，十分可怕，脸颊上的皮肤绷得那么
紧，甚至可以看到下面骨头的轮廓。真怕他这样下去，不久便会害上一场大病。
在艰难的日子里，小孩子常常会产生一种令人奇怪的智慧。查理就是这样。现在他做起
事来十分镇静地开始作一些小小的改变，好节省下他的一点儿体力。早上他提早十分钟离
家，这样上学就可以慢慢地走而不必跑。课间休息时别的同学冲到户外去掷雪球，在雪地里
摔跤，他却安静地坐在教室里休息。现在他不管做什么事都又慢又小心，不让自己精疲力
竭。
一天下午，他迎着扑面而来的寒风放学回家不时感到前所未有的饥饿，但突然他的眼睛
被雪地上路沟里一样银光闪闪的东西吸引住了。查理走下人行道，弯下腰去看。这东西有一
部分埋在雪下，但他马上看出这是什么了。
是枚五十便士的银币！
他连忙环顾四周。
是有人刚掉下的吗？
不是，不可能是刚掉下的，因为它有一部分已经埋在雪里。
人行道上，有几个人在他的身边匆匆走过，他们把下巴深深地埋在大衣的领子里，脚嘎
吱嘎吱地踩着雪。他们没有一人在找钱，也没有一人稍微注意一下这个蹲在路沟旁的小孩
子。
那么，这枚五十便士的银币便是他的了？
他可以要吗？
查理小心翼翼地把它从雪里拉出来。它又湿又脏，但仍然完好无缺。
整整五十便士！
查理用颤抖着的手指把它夹紧，低下头来看。这时候它使他想到一样东西，只想到一样
东西，那就是吃的东西。
查理不知不觉地转过身，朝最近的一家商店走去。它只有十步远……是一家卖报纸和文
具的商店。这种商店差不多什么东西都卖，包括糖果和烟……他马上轻轻对自己说，他该做
什么呢……他可以买一块好吃的巧克力糖，把它全部吃下去，一点儿不剩，买来就当场吃
掉……余下的钱直接带回家去交给他的妈妈。
11 The Miracle
11 The Miracle
Charlie entered the shop and laid the damp fifty pence on the counter.
‘One Wonka’s Whipple- Scrumptious Fudge- mallow Delight,’ he said, remembering
how much he had loved the one he had on his birthday.
The man behind the counter looked fat and well-fed. He had big lips and fat cheeks
and a very fat neck. The fat around his neck bulged out all around the top of his collar
like a rubber ring. He turned and reached behind him for the chocolate bar, then he
turned back again and handed it to Charlie. Charlie grabbed it and quickly tore off the
wrapper and took an enormous bite. Then he took another… and another… and oh, the
joy of being able to cram large pieces of something sweet and solid into one’s mouth!
The sheer blissful joy of being able to fill one’s mouth with rich solid food!
‘You look like you wanted that one, sonny,’ the shopkeeper said pleasantly.
Charlie nodded, his mouth bulging with chocolate.
The shopkeeper put Charlie’s change on the counter. ‘Take it easy,’ he said. ‘It’ll give
you a tummy-ache if you swallow it like that without chewing.’
Charlie went on wolfing the chocolate. He couldn’t stop. And in less than half a
minute, the whole thing had disappeared down his throat. He was quite out of breath,
but he felt marvellously, extraordinarily happy. He reached out a hand to take the
change. Then he paused. His eyes were just above the level of the counter. They were
staring at the silver coins lying there. The coins were all five-penny pieces. There were
nine of them altogether. Surely it wouldn’t matter if he spent just one more…
‘I think,’ he said quietly, ‘I think… I’ll have just one more of those chocolate bars. The
same kind as before, please.’
‘Why not?’ the fat shopkeeper said, reaching behind him again and taking another
Whipple-Scrumptious Fudgemallow Delight from the shelf. He laid it on the counter.
Charlie picked it up and tore off the wrapper… and suddenly… from underneath the
wrapper… there came a brilliant flash of gold.
Charlie’s heart stood still.
‘It’s a Golden Ticket!’ screamed the shopkeeper, leaping about a foot in the air.
‘You’ve got a Golden Ticket! You’ve found the last Golden Ticket! Hey, would you
believe it! Come and look at this, everybody! The kid’s found Wonka’s last Golden
Ticket! There it is! It’s right here in his hands!’
It seemed as though the shopkeeper might be going to have a fit. ‘In my shop, too!’ he
yelled. ‘He found it right here in my own little shop! Somebody call the newspapers
quick and let them know! Watch out now, sonny! Don’t tear it as you unwrap it! That
thing’s precious!’
In a few seconds, there was a crowd of about twenty people clustering around Charlie,
and many more were pushing their way in from the street. Everybody wanted to get a
look at the Golden Ticket and at the lucky finder.
‘Where is it?’ somebody shouted. ‘Hold it up so all of us can see it!’
‘There it is, there!’ someone else shouted. ‘He’s holding it in his hands! See the gold
shining!’
‘How did he manage to find it, I’d like to know?’ a large boy shouted angrily. ‘Twenty
bars a day I’ve been buying for weeks and weeks!’
‘Think of all the free stuff he’ll be getting too!’ another boy said enviously. ‘A lifetime
supply!’
‘He’ll need it, the skinny little shrimp!’ a girl said, laughing.
Charlie hadn’t moved. He hadn’t even unwrapped the Golden Ticket from around the
chocolate. He was standing very still, holding it tightly with both hands while the crowd
pushed and shouted all around him. He felt quite dizzy. There was a peculiar floating
sensation coming over him, as though he were floating up in the air like a balloon. His
feet didn’t seem to be touching the ground at all. He could hear his heart thumping
away loudly somewhere in his throat.
At that point, he became aware of a hand resting lightly on his shoulder, and when he
looked up, he saw a tall man standing over him. ‘Listen,’ the man whispered. ‘I’ll buy it
from you. I’ll give you fifty pounds. How about it, eh? And I’ll give you a new bicycle as
well. Okay?’
‘Are you crazy?’ shouted a woman who was standing equally close. ‘Why, I’d give him
two hundred pounds for that ticket! You want to sell that ticket for two hundred pounds,
young man?’
‘That’s quite enough of that!’ the fat shopkeeper shouted, pushing his way through the
crowd and taking Charlie firmly by the arm. ‘Leave the kid alone, will you! Make way
there! Let him out!’ And to Charlie, as he led him to the door, he whispered, ‘Don’t you
let anybody have it! Take it straight home, quickly, before you lose it! Run all the way
and don’t stop till you get there, you understand?’
Charlie nodded.
‘You know something,’ the fat shopkeeper said, pausing a moment and smiling at
Charlie, ‘I have a feeling you needed a break like this. I’m awfully glad you got it. Good
luck to you, sonny.’
‘Thank you,’ Charlie said, and off he went, running through the snow as fast as his
legs would go. And as he flew past Mr Willy Wonka’s factory, he turned and waved at it
and sang out, ‘I’ll be seeing you! I’ll be seeing you soon!’ And five minutes later he
arrived at his own home.
11　奇迹
　　11　奇迹
　　查理走进那家商店，把那枚湿漉漉的五十便士的银币放在柜台上。
　　“请给我一块旺卡的一流开心牛奶巧克力软糖。”他说着，想起了自己多么爱吃过生日时吃过的那块巧克力糖。
　　柜台后面的人看来吃得很好，胖胖的。他厚嘴唇，胖脸，脖子也非常胖，脖子周围的肥肉在领子上面鼓起来，像一个橡皮轮胎。他转过身去拿身后的一块巧克力糖，再转过身来递给查理。查理把它一把抓住，马上撕掉包糖纸，咬了一大口。接着又是一口……又是一口……噢，能大口大口吃一整块甜甜的巧克力糖，这多么痛快啊！能把这么多食物塞满一嘴，这简直是无上快乐！
　　“看来你正需要这块糖，孩子。”店老板高兴地说。
　　查理只能点头，因为他的嘴塞满了巧克力糖。
　　店老板把找给查理的零钱放在柜台上。“慢慢吃吧！”他说，“这样连嚼也不嚼就吞下去，会肚子痛的。”
　　查理继续狼吞虎咽地吃那块巧克力糖。他停不下来。不到半分钟，整块巧克力糖已经进了他的喉咙不见了。他简直连气也透不过来，但是觉得异常痛快。他伸手去拿找给他的钱。
　　但他停下来了。他的眼睛与柜台齐平。它们盯住了柜台上那些银币。全是五便士一枚的银币，一共九枚。仅仅再花掉一枚绝对没有关系……“我想，”他轻轻地说，“我想……我想再买一块那种巧克力糖，跟刚才那块一样的，谢谢你。”
　　“没问题，”胖老板说着又转过身去，从架子上再拿下一块旺卡的一流开心牛奶巧克力软糖。他把糖放在柜台上。
　　查理把它拿起来，撕开包糖纸……忽然之间……从包糖纸里……闪出一道耀眼的金光。
　　查理的心停止了跳动。
　　“是一张金奖券！”店老板腾空跳了几乎一英尺高，大叫着，“你得到了一张金奖券！你找到了最后一张金奖券！哎，你能相信吗？大家快过来看哪！这孩子找到了旺卡的最后一张金奖券！就在这里！就在他的手里！”
　　这店老板好像要发狂了。“而且是在我的店里！”他叫道，“他就在我这小店里找到了它！
　　你们哪一位快去通知报馆，告诉他们！现在小心点，孩子！把它拉出来的时候不要把它撕坏了！这张纸太贵重了！”
　　不到几秒钟，二十几个人就围住了查理，还有更多的人从街上挤进来。人人都想见识见识这张金奖券和这位幸运得主。
　　“奖券在哪里？”有人大声问道，“把它举高，让我们都能看到它！”
　　“它在那里，在那里！”另一个人叫道，“那孩子把它拿在手里！看，金光闪闪的！”
　　“我倒想知道他怎么会找到金奖券！”一个大男孩生气地叫道，“这几个星期，我每天都买上二十块这种巧克力糖！”
　　“再想想他将免费得到的一切东西！”另一个男孩妒忌地说，“供他吃一辈子的东西！”
　　“他需要吃啊，这皮包骨头的小家伙。”一个女孩笑着说。
　　查理一动也不动。他甚至没有把裹着巧克力糖的金奖券抽出来。当周围的人又推搡又叫嚷的时候，他就这样一动不动地站在那里，双手紧紧抓住那张金奖券。他感到头晕眼花。他有一种奇怪的飘飘然的感觉，好像自己是个气球在空中飘来飘去。他的脚像是根本没有碰到地面。他能够听到他的心在喉咙里怦怦直跳。
　　就在这时候，查理感到有一只手轻轻地搭在他的肩上。他抬起头，看见一个高个子男人站在他面前。“听我说，”那人悄悄说，“我想买下你这张奖券。我给你五十英镑，怎么样，外加一辆新的自行车，好吗？”
　　“你疯了吗？”一个站得同样近的女人叫道，“哼，我愿给他两百英镑买下这张奖券！小朋友，你肯把这张奖券两百英镑卖给我吗？”
　　“够了够了！”胖老板叫着从人群中挤过来，抓紧了查理的手臂，“别打扰这孩子好不好！
　　让让路！让他出去！”他把查理送到店门口，悄悄地对查理说：“别让任何人得到它！趁没把它卖掉，快拿着它直接回家吧！一路跑回去，不到家不要停下来，明白吗？”
　　查理点点头。
　　“你知道吗，”胖老板停了一下，对查理微笑着说，“我有一个感觉，你需要这样一个转机。你得到了它，我替你高兴。祝你好运，孩子。”
　　“谢谢你。”查理说着拔腿就跑，能跑多快跑多快，一路穿过雪地。当他飞也似的跑过威利•旺卡先生的工厂时，他转身对它挥手高唱：“我要来看你！我很快就要来看你！”五分钟后，他回到了自己的家。
 
12 What It Said on the Golden Ticket
12 What It Said on the Golden Ticket
Charlie burst through the front door, shouting, ‘Mother! Mother! Mother!’
Mrs Bucket was in the old grandparents’ room, serving them their evening soup.
‘Mother!’ yelled Charlie, rushing in on them like a hurricane. ‘Look! I’ve got it! Look,
Mother, look! The last Golden Ticket! It’s mine! I found some money in the street and I
bought two bars of chocolate and the second one had the Golden Ticket and there were
crowds of people all around me wanting to see it and the shopkeeper rescued me and I
ran all the way home and here I am! IT’s THE FIFTH GOLDEN TICKET, MOTHER, AND I’
VE FOUND IT!’
Mrs Bucket simply stood and stared, while the four old grandparents, who were sitting
up in bed balancing bowls of soup on their laps, all dropped their spoons with a clatter
and froze against their pillows.
For about ten seconds there was absolute silence in the room. Nobody dared to speak
or move. It was a magic moment.
Then, very softly, Grandpa Joe said, ‘You’re pulling our legs, Charlie, aren’t you?
You’re having a little joke?’
‘I am not!’ cried Charlie, rushing up to the bed and holding out the large and beautiful
Golden Ticket for him to see.
Grandpa Joe leaned forward and took a close look, his nose almost touching the
ticket. The others watched him, waiting for the verdict.
Then very slowly, with a slow and marvellous grin spreading all over his face,
Grandpa Joe lifted his head and looked straight at Charlie. The colour was rushing to his
cheeks, and his eyes were wide open, shining with joy, and in the centre of each eye,
right in the very centre, in the black pupil, a little spark of wild excitement was slowly
dancing. Then the old man took a deep breath, and suddenly, with no warning
whatsoever, an explosion seemed to take place inside him. He threw up his arms and
yelled ‘Yippeeeeeeee!’ And at the same time, his long bony body rose up out of the bed
and his bowl of soup went flying into the face of Grandma Josephine, and in one
fantastic leap, this old fellow of ninety-six and a half, who hadn’t been out of bed these
last twenty years, jumped on to the floor and started doing a dance of victory in his
pyjamas.
‘Yippeeeeeeeeee!’ he shouted. ‘Three cheers for Charlie! Hip, hip, hooray!’
At this point, the door opened, and Mr Bucket walked into the room. He was cold and
tired, and he looked it. All day long, he had been shovelling snow in the streets.
‘Cripes!’ he cried. ‘What’s going on in here?’
It didn’t take them long to tell him what had happened.
‘I don’t believe it!’ he said. ‘It’s not possible.’
‘Show him the ticket, Charlie!’ shouted Grandpa Joe, who was still dancing around
the floor like a dervish in his striped pyjamas. ‘Show your father the fifth and last
Golden Ticket in the world!’
‘Let me see it, Charlie,’ Mr Bucket said, collapsing into a chair and holding out his
hand. Charlie came forward with the precious document.
It was a very beautiful thing, this Golden Ticket, having been made, so it seemed,
from a sheet of pure gold hammered out almost to the thinness of paper. On one side of
it, printed by some clever method in jet-black letters, was the invitation itself - from Mr
Wonka.
‘Read it aloud,’ said Grandpa Joe, climbing back into bed again at last. ‘Let’s all hear
exactly what it says.’
Mr Bucket held the lovely Golden Ticket up close to his eyes. His hands were
trembling slightly, and he seemed to be overcome by the whole business. He took
several deep breaths. Then he cleared his throat, and said, ‘All right, I’ll read it. Here we
go:
‘Greetings to you, the lucky finder of this Golden Ticket, from Mr Willy Wonka! I shake
you warmly by the hand! Tremendous things are in store for you! Many wonderful
surprises await you! For now, I do invite you to come to my factory and be my guest for
one whole day - you and all others who are lucky enough to find my Golden Tickets. I,
Willy Wonka, will conduct you around the factory myself, showing you everything that
there is to see, and afterwards, when it is time to leave, you will be escorted home by a
procession of large trucks. These trucks, I can promise you, will be loaded with enough
delicious eatables to last you and your entire household for many years. If, at any time
thereafter, you should run out of supplies, you have only to come back to the factory
and show this Golden Ticket, and I shall be happy to refill your cupboard with whatever
you want. In this way, you will be able to keep yourself supplied with tasty morsels for
the rest of your life. But this is by no means the most exciting thing that will happen on
the day of your visit. I am preparing other surprises that are even more marvellous and
more fantastic for you and for all my beloved Golden Ticket holders - mystic and
marvellous surprises that will entrance, delight, intrigue, astonish, and perplex you
beyond measure. In your wildest dreams you could not imagine that such things could
happen to you! Just wait and see! And now, here are your instructions: the day I have
chosen for the visit is the first day in the month of February. On this day, and on no
other, you must come to the factory gates at ten o’clock sharp in the morning. Don’t be
late! And you are allowed to bring with you either one or two members of your own
family to look after you and to ensure that you don’t get into mischief. One more thing -
be certain to have this ticket with you, otherwise you will not be admitted.
(Signed) Willy Wonka.’
‘The first day of February!’ cried Mrs Bucket. ‘But that’s tomorrow!. Today is the last
day of January. I know it is!’
‘Cripes!’ said Mr Bucket. I think you’re right!’
‘You’re just in time!’ shouted Grandpa Joe. ‘There’s not a moment to lose. You must
start making preparations at once! Wash your face, comb your hair, scrub your hands,
brush your teeth, blow your nose, cut your nails, polish your shoes, iron your shirt, and
for heaven’s sake, get all that mud off your pants! You must get ready, my boy! You
must get ready for the biggest day of your life!’
‘Now don’t over-excite yourself, Grandpa,’ Mrs Bucket said. ‘And don’t fluster poor
Charlie. We must all try to keep very calm. Now the first thing to decide is this who is
going to go with Charlie to the factory?’
‘I will!’ shouted Grandpa Joe, leaping out of bed once again. ‘I’ll take him! I’ll look
after him! You leave it to me!’
Mrs Bucket smiled at the old man, then she turned to her husband and said, ‘How
about you, dear? Don’t you think you ought to go?’
‘Well…’ Mr Bucket said, pausing to think about it, ‘no… I’m not so sure that I should.’
‘But you must.’
‘There’s no must about it, my dear,’ Mr Bucket said gently. ‘Mind you, I’d love to go.
It’ll be tremendously exciting. But on the other hand… I believe that the person who
really deserves to go most of all is Grandpa Joe himself. He seems to know more about it
than we do. Provided, of course, that he feels well enough…’
‘Yippeeeeee!’ shouted Grandpa Joe, seizing Charlie by the hands and dancing round
the room.
‘He certainly seems well enough,’ Mrs Bucket said, laughing. ‘Yes… perhaps you’re
right after all. Perhaps Grandpa Joe should be the one to go with him. I certainly can’t
go myself and leave the other three old people all alone in bed for a whole day.’
‘Hallelujah!’ yelled Grandpa Joe. ‘Praise the Lord!’
At that point, there came a loud knock on the front door. Mr Bucket went to open it,
and the next moment, swarms of newspapermen and photographers were pouring into
the house. They had tracked down the finder of the fifth Golden Ticket, and now they all
wanted to get the full story for the front pages of the morning papers. For several hours,
there was complete pandemonium in the little house, and it must have been nearly
midnight before Mr Bucket was able to get rid of them so that Charlie could go to bed.
12　金奖券上说些什么
12　金奖券上说些什么
查理冲进前门大叫：“妈妈！妈妈！妈妈！”
巴克特太太正在四位老人家的房间里侍候着他们吃晚餐的汤。
“妈妈！”查理大叫着，像一股旋风似的冲进他们的房间，“瞧，我得到它了！瞧，妈妈，
瞧！最后一张金奖券！它是我的了！我在街上捡到一点儿钱，买了两块巧克力糖，第二块里
面藏着这张金奖券，接着一大群人围着我要看它，店老板替我解了围。我一路上跑着回家。
我回来啦！这是第五张金奖券，妈妈，我找到它了！”
巴克特太太只是站在一旁看着。四位老人家正坐在床上，盛汤的盘子平放在膝上，他们
拿着的汤匙一下子全咔哒一声落下来。他们靠着枕头呆若木鸡。
房间里足足有十秒钟鸦雀无声。没有人敢说一句话，没有人敢动一动。这真是一个迷人
的时刻。
最后，约瑟夫爷爷很轻很轻地说：“你在跟我们开玩笑，对吗，查理？你在开一个小小的
玩笑？”
“我没有开玩笑！”查理叫着，冲到床前，把那张又大又漂亮的金奖券递给他看。
约瑟夫爷爷俯身向前，靠近点看，他的鼻子几乎碰到了奖券。其他人看着他，等着他证
实。
接着约瑟夫爷爷的脸上一点儿一点儿地绽开一个美丽的笑容，他抬起头来直望着查理。
他的两颊泛起红霞，他的两眼睁大，闪着快乐的光芒，每只眼睛的正中心，在黑色的瞳孔
里，慢慢地跳动着狂喜的小火花。接着，这位老人家深深地吸了一口气，突然，事前毫无动
静，他体内好像来了一个大爆炸。他挥起双臂，放声大叫：“好啊啊啊啊啊啊啊！”与此同
时，他瘦长的身体已经起来，离开了床，他那碗汤泼到了约瑟芬奶奶的脸上。这位九十六岁
半、二十多年没有下过床的老先生一下子跳到了地板上，穿着他的睡衣，开始跳起胜利的舞
蹈来。
“好啊啊啊啊啊啊啊！”他高声欢呼，“为查理三呼万岁！万岁，万岁，万万岁！”
正在这时候，门打开了，巴克特先生走进房间。他看上去是在街上铲了一天的雪。
“哎呀，”他叫道，“这里出什么事啦？”
他们连忙把所发生的事情原原本本地告诉了他。
“我不相信！”他说，“这是不可能的。”
“查理，给他看看奖券！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，他穿着睡衣，在地板上团团转地狂舞，“给你
爸爸看看这世界上的第五张，也是最后一张金奖券吧！”
“让我看看，查理。”巴克特先生说着便瘫倒在一把椅子上，伸出一只手。查理拿着那张
贵重的奖券走过去。
这张金奖券非常漂亮，看来是用纯金打成的金箔，薄得几乎像纸。奖券的一面，用巧妙
的办法印上了乌黑发亮的字，是旺卡先生发的邀请信。
“把信大声念出来，”约瑟夫爷爷说，他终于重新爬回床上去，“让大家听听到底说些什
么。”
巴克特先生把那张可爱的奖券凑到眼前。他的手微微发抖，看来这件事使他受不了。他
深深地吸了几口气。接着他清了清喉咙说：“好吧，我来念。信是这样写的。”
我，威利•旺卡，祝贺你，这张金奖券的幸运得主！我热烈地握你的手！大批东西已经为
你储备着！许多你意想不到的好东西正等着你来取！现在我谨邀请你到我的工厂做客一整天
——包括你和其他几位找到我的金奖券的幸运儿。我，威利•旺卡，将亲自带领你们参观工
厂，让你们看这里所有的东西。最后在临走时，将有一队大卡车送你们回家。我可以向你保
证，这些卡车装有足够的美味食物，够你和你的全家吃上许多年。今后你如果缺少食物，只
要到工厂来出示金奖券，我将乐意用你所想要的食物重新装满你的橱柜。这样，你就可以一
生吃上美味佳肴了。但这还比不上你在参观那天将碰到的最刺激的事。我正准备带给你和所
有亲爱的奖券得主别的更不可思议、更奇妙的意外惊喜。这些不可思议和奇妙的意外东西将
使你们感到无限着迷、狂喜、好奇、惊讶和迷惑不解。即使做最荒诞的梦，你们也想象不出
会碰到这样的事情！就等着瞧吧！现在我给你以下的通知：参观日期我已定在二月的第一
天。就在这一天而不在其他任何一天，你必须在上午十时整到达工厂的大门口。千万不要迟
到！你可以带一两位家人来照顾你，并保证你不淘气。还有一件事——必须带着这张奖券，
否则恕不接待。
威利•旺卡（签字）
“二月的第一天！”巴克特太太叫道，“那就是明天啊！今天是一月的最后一天。我知道是
的！”
“哎呀！”巴克特先生说，“我想你是对的！”
“你正好赶上！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“现在一分钟也不能浪费了。你必须马上准备！洗脸，
梳头发，擦手，刷牙，擤鼻涕，剪指甲，擦皮鞋，熨衬衫。天哪，刷掉你裤子上的泥巴！你
必须做好准备，我的孩子！你必须为你一生中最重大的日子做好准备！”
“你不要过分激动，爷爷，”巴克特太太说，“不要弄得可怜的查理晕头转向。我们都必须
尽力保持镇静。现在第一件要决定的事情是——谁和查理一起进工厂？”
“我去！”约瑟夫爷爷大叫一声，再次跳下床来，“我陪他去！我照顾他！这件事包在我身
上好了！”
巴克特太太对老人家笑了笑，接着转向她的丈夫说：“你怎么样，亲爱的？你不认为你应
该去吗？”
“这个嘛……”巴克特先生说了一声，停下来想了想，“不……我可不能断定该由我去。”
“但是你必须去。”
“没有什么必须不必须的，我亲爱的，”巴克特先生温和地说，“告诉你，我很想去。那太
叫人高兴了。但从另一方面说……我相信真正最配得上去的人是约瑟夫爷爷，对这件事他看
来比我们知道得都多。当然，这要看他的身体行不行……”
“好啊啊啊啊啊啊啊！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，拉住查理的双手，绕着房间跳舞。
“他的身体看来的确很好，”巴克特太太哈哈笑着说，“不错……也许还是你说得对。也许
应该由约瑟夫爷爷带他去。我当然不能去，不能全天把其他三位老人家单独丢在床上。”
“赞美主！”约瑟夫爷爷大声说，“赞美主！”
这时候，前门响起很重的敲门声。巴克特先生走去开门，转眼间一群群新闻记者和摄影
师像潮水一样涌进屋来。他们已经追查到第五张金奖券的得主是谁，现在要来采访事情的全
部经过，准备刊登在早报的头版上。小房子里闹了好几个钟头。等到巴克特先生把他们全打
发走，好让查理能上床睡觉时，已经接近半夜了。
13 The Big Day Arrives
13 The Big Day Arrives
The sun was shining brightly on the morning of the big day, but the ground was still
white with snow and the air was very cold.
Outside the gates of Wonka’s factory, enormous crowds of people had gathered to
watch the five lucky ticket holders going in. The excitement was tremendous. It was just
before ten o’clock. The crowds were pushing and shouting, and policemen with arms
linked were trying to hold them back from the gates.
Right beside the gates, in a small group that was carefully shielded from the crowds
by the police, stood the five famous children, together with the grown-ups who had
come with them.
The tall bony figure of Grandpa Joe could be seen standing quietly among them, and
beside him, holding tightly on to his hand, was little Charlie Bucket himself.
All the children, except Charlie, had both their mothers and fathers with them, and it
was a good thing that they had, otherwise the whole party might have got out of hand.
They were so eager to get going that their parents were having to hold them back by
force to prevent them from climbing over the gates. ‘Be patient!’ cried the fathers. ‘Be
still! It’s not time yet! It’s not ten o’clock!’
Behind him, Charlie Bucket could hear the shouts of the people in the crowd as they
pushed and fought to get a glimpse of the famous children.
‘There’s Violet Beauregarde!’ he heard someone shouting. ‘That’s her all right! I can
remember her face from the newspapers!’
‘And you know what?’ somebody else shouted back. ‘She’s still chewing that dreadful
old piece of gum she’s had for three months! You look at her jaws! They’re still working
on it!’
‘Who’s the big fat boy?’
‘That’s Augustus Gloop!’
‘So it is!’
‘Enormous, isn’t he!’
‘Fantastic!’
‘Who’s the kid with a picture of The Lone Ranger stencilled on his windcheater?’
‘That’s Mike Teavee! He’s the television fiend!’
‘He must be crazy! Look at all those toy pistols he’s got hanging all over him!’
‘The one I want to see is Veruca Salt!’ shouted another voice in the crowd. ‘She’s the
girl whose father bought up half a million chocolate bars and then made the workers in
his peanut factory unwrap every one of them until they found a Golden Ticket! He gives
her anything she wants! Absolutely anything! She only has to start screaming for it and
she gets it!’
‘Dreadful, isn’t it?’
‘Shocking, I call it!’
‘Which do you think is her?’
‘That one! Over there on the left! The little girl in the silver mink coat!’
‘Which one is Charlie Bucket?’
‘Charlie Bucket? He must be that skinny little shrimp standing beside the old fellow
who looks like a skeleton. Very close to us. Just there! See him?’
‘Why hasn’t he got a coat on in this cold weather?’
‘Don’t ask me. Maybe he can’t afford to buy one.’
‘Goodness me! He must be freezing!’
Charlie, standing only a few paces away from the speaker, gave Grandpa Joe’s hand a
squeeze, and the old man looked down at Charlie and smiled.
Somewhere in the distance, a church clock began striking ten.
Very slowly, with a loud creaking of rusty hinges, the great iron gates of the factory
began to swing open.
The crowd became suddenly silent. The children stopped jumping about. All eyes
were fixed upon the gates.
‘ There he is!’ somebody shouted. ‘Thats him!’
And so it was!
13　重大的日子来临了
13　重大的日子来临了
在那个重大日子的早晨，阳光明媚，但地上还是白雪皑皑，天气仍旧寒冷。
旺卡工厂的大门外面已经聚集了大群大群的人，要看那五位幸运的奖券得主进厂。大家
无比兴奋。这时快到十点了。人群推推搡搡，大喊大叫。警察带着武器，手拉手排成一行，
设法阻止他们靠近工厂大门。
就在大门旁边，警察们小心地保护着一小群人，不让人群靠近他们。这一小群人中有那
五个出了名的孩子，还有陪他们来的大人。
可以看到皮包骨头的高个子约瑟夫爷爷安静地站在他们当中，旁边是紧紧拉住他的手的
小查理•巴克特。
除了查理，所有孩子都由父母陪同，也幸亏他们的父母来，否则整个队伍准会闹得一塌
糊涂。这些孩子那么急着要进工厂，他们的父母只好使劲地把他们拉回来，不让他们爬铁
门。“耐心一点儿！”爸爸们喊道，“别动！时间还没有到呢！还没有到十点钟！”
查理•巴克特听到后面人群的叫声，他们又推又搡，要挤过来看看这些出了名的孩子。
“那是维奥莉特•博雷加德！”他听见有人叫道，“没错，是她！我记得她在报上的那张
脸！”
“你知道吗？”另一个人叫起来，“她还在嚼着那片已经嚼了三个月的可怕的旧口香糖呢！
你瞧她的上下颌！它们还在把它嚼个没完！”
“那个大胖男孩是谁？”
“就是奥古斯塔斯•格卢普呀！”
“没错，是他！”
“真是胖得不能再胖了，不是吗？”
“简直不可思议！”
“那个男孩是谁，防风上衣上印着独行侠照片的？”
“那是迈克•蒂维！他是个电视迷！”
“他一定疯了！瞧他全身挂满了玩具枪！”
“我要看的是维鲁卡•索尔特！”人群中又有一个声音叫道，“就是那个女孩，她的爸爸买了
五十万块巧克力糖，还叫他花生工厂的女工把每块糖的包糖纸剥下来，直到找到一张金奖券
为止！她要什么爸爸就给她什么！千真万确的，要什么有什么！她只要开口——哭着要，一
定能够得到！”
“真可怕，不是吗？”
“我说是骇人听闻！”
“你说哪一个是她？”
“就是那一个！在那儿左边的！那个穿银貂皮大衣的小女孩！”
“哪一个是查理•巴克特？”
“查理•巴克特？一定是那个皮包骨头的小家伙，站在像一具骷髅似的老家伙身边，离我们
很近的。就在那里！看见他了没有？”
“天气这么冷，他为什么连外衣也不穿呢？”
“别问我，也许他买不起。”
“天哪！他一定要冻僵啦！”
查理站在离这说话的人只有几步的地方，捏捏约瑟夫爷爷的手。爷爷低头看着查理，微
笑着。
远处教堂的钟开始敲十点了。
工厂的大门开始很慢很慢地打开，生锈的铰链发出很响的嘎吱嘎吱声。
人群忽然静下来。孩子们不再跳来跳去。所有的眼睛都盯着铁门看。
“他就在那里！”有人大叫，“那就是他！”
“的确是他！”
14 Mr Willy Wonka
14 Mr Willy Wonka
Mr Wonka was standing all alone just inside the open gates of the factory.
And what an extraordinary little man he was!
He had a black top hat on his head.
He wore a tail coat made of a beautiful plum-coloured velvet.
His trousers were bottle green.
His gloves were pearly grey.
And in one hand he carried a fine gold-topped walking cane.
Covering his chin, there was a small, neat, pointed black beard - a goatee. And his
eyes - his eyes were most marvellously bright. They seemed to be sparkling and
twinkling at you all the time. The whole face, in fact, was alight with fun and laughter.
And oh, how clever he looked! How quick and sharp and full of life! He kept making
quick jerky little movements with his head, cocking it this way and that, and taking
everything in with those bright twinkling eyes. He was like a squirrel in the quickness of
his movements, like a quick clever old squirrel from the park.
Suddenly, he did a funny little skipping dance in the snow, and he spread his arms
wide, and he smiled at the five children who were clustered near the gates, and he called
out, ‘Welcome, my little friends! Welcome to the factory!’
His voice was high and flutey. ‘Will you come forward one at a time, please,’ he called
out, ‘and bring your parents. Then show me your Golden Ticket and give me your name.
Who’s first?’
The big fat boy stepped up. ‘I’m Augustus Gloop,’ he said.
‘Augustus!’ cried Mr Wonka, seizing his hand and pumping it up and down with
terrific force. ‘My dear boy, how good to see you! Delighted! Charmed! Overjoyed to
have you with us! And these are your parents? How nice! Come in! Come in! That’s right!
Step through the gates!’
Mr Wonka was clearly just as excited as everybody else.
‘My name,’ said the next child to go forward, ‘is Veruca Salt.’
‘My dear Veruca! How do you do? What a pleasure this is! You do have an interesting
name, don’t you? I always thought that a veruca was a sort of wart that you got on the
sole of your foot! But I must be wrong, mustn’t I? How pretty you look in that lovely
mink coat! I’m so glad you could come! Dear me, this is going to be such an exciting day!
I do hope you enjoy it! I’m sure you will! I know you will! Your father? How are you, Mr
Salt? And Mrs Salt? Overjoyed to see you! Yes, the ticket is quite in order! Please go in!’
The next two children, Violet Beauregarde and Mike Teavee, came forward to have
their tickets examined and then to have their arms practically pumped off their
shoulders by the energetic Mr Wonka.
And last of all, a small nervous voice whispered, ‘Charlie Bucket.’
‘Charlie!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Well, well, well! So there you are! You’re the one who
found your ticket only yesterday, aren’t you? Yes, yes. I read all about it in this
morning’s papers! Just in time, my dear boy! I’m so glad! So happy for you! And this?
Your grandfather? Delighted to meet you, sir! Overjoyed! Enraptured! Enchanted! All
right! Excellent! Is everybody in now? Five children? Yes! Good! Now will you please
follow me! Our tour is about to begin! But do keep together! Please don’t wander off by
yourselves! I shouldn’t like to lose any of you at this stage of the proceedings! Oh, dear
me, no!’
Charlie glanced back over his shoulder and saw the great iron entrance gates slowly
closing behind him. The crowds on the outside were still pushing and shouting. Charlie
took a last look at them. Then, as the gates closed with a clang, all sight of the outside
world disappeared.
‘Here we are!’ cried Mr Wonka, trotting along in front of the group. ‘Through this big
red door, please! That’s right! It’s nice and warm inside! I have to keep it warm inside
the factory because of the workers! My workers are used to an extremely hot climate!
They can’t stand the cold! They’d perish if they went outdoors in this weather! They’d
freeze to death!’
‘But who are these workers?’ asked Augustus Gloop.
‘All in good time, my dear boy!’ said Mr Wonka, smiling at Augustus. ‘Be patient! You
shall see everything as we go along! Are all of you inside? Good! Would you mind
closing the door? Thank you!’
Charlie Bucket found himself standing in a long corridor that stretched away in front
of him as far as he could see. The corridor was so wide that a car could easily have been
driven along it. The walls were pale pink, the lighting was soft and pleasant.
‘How lovely and warm!’ whispered Charlie.
‘I know. And what a marvellous smell!’ answered Grandpa Joe, taking a long deep
sniff. All the most wonderful smells in the world seemed to be mixed up in the air
around them - the smell of roasting coffee and burnt sugar and melting chocolate and
mint and violets and crushed hazelnuts and apple blossom and caramel and lemon
peel…
And far away in the distance, from the heart of the great factory, came a muffled roar
of energy as though some monstrous gigantic machine were spinning its wheels at
breakneck speed.
‘Now this, my dear children,’ said Mr Wonka, raising his voice above the noise, ‘this is
the main corridor. Will you please hang your coats and hats on those pegs over there,
and then follow me. That’s the way! Good! Everyone ready? Come on, then! Here we go!’
He trotted off rapidly down the corridor with the tails of his plum-coloured velvet coat
flapping behind him, and the visitors all hurried after him.
It was quite a large party of people, when you came to think of it. There were nine
grown-ups and five children, fourteen in all. So you can imagine that there was a good
deal of pushing and shoving as they hustled and bustled down the passage, trying to
keep up with the swift little figure in front of them. ‘Come on!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Get a
move on, please! We’ll never get round today if you dawdle like this!’
Soon, he turned right off the main corridor into another slightly narrower passage.
Then he turned left.
Then left again.
Then right.
Then left.
Then right.
Then right.
Then left.
The place was like a gigantic rabbit warren, with passages leading this way and that
in every direction.
‘Don’t you let go my hand, Charlie,’ whispered Grandpa Joe.
‘Notice how all these passages are sloping downwards!’ called out Mr Wonka. ‘We are
now going underground! All the most important rooms in my factory are deep down
below the surface!’
‘Why is that?’ somebody asked.
‘There wouldn’t be nearly enough space for them up on top!’ answered Mr Wonka.
‘These rooms we are going to see are enormous! They’re larger than football fields! No
building in the world would be big enough to house them! But down here, underneath
the ground, I’ve got all the space I want. There’s no limit - so long as I hollow it out.’
Mr Wonka turned right.
He turned left.
He turned right again.
The passages were sloping steeper and steeper downhill now.
Then suddenly, Mr Wonka stopped. In front of him, there was a shiny metal door. The
party crowded round. On the door, in large letters, it said:
THE CHOCOLATE ROOM
14　威利·旺卡先生
14　威利•旺卡先生
旺卡先生独自一人站在工厂打开的大门里面。
他是一个多么矮小的人啊！
他头上戴着一顶黑色高顶礼帽。
他身上穿着一件漂亮的桃红色天鹅绒燕尾服。
他的裤子是深绿色的。
他的手套是银灰色的。
他的一只手拿着一根精致的金头手杖。
他的下巴有一小把整齐的黑色尖胡子——山羊胡子。还有他的眼睛——他的眼睛亮得惊
人，它们好像一直在对你闪烁不停。事实上，他满脸焕发着快活的神采。
噢，他的样子多么聪明啊！他多么矫健、敏锐和充满生命力啊！他的头不断地作出急速
的小动作，转向这边，转向那边，把一切全收进了那双晶亮闪烁的眼睛里。他动作灵敏得恰
似一只松鼠——公园里的一只灵活聪明的老松鼠。
忽然之间，他在雪地上滑稽地轻轻跳动着，张开了双臂，对五个集合在大门口的孩子微
笑着高声说：“欢迎，我的小朋友！欢迎你们到工厂来！”
他的声音很高，柔和而清亮。“请你们一个一个过来，”他叫道，“带着你们的家长。然后
给我看看你们的奖券，再告诉我你们的姓名。谁第一个来？”
大胖男孩走上前。“我叫奥古斯塔斯•格卢普。”他说。
“奥古斯塔斯？”旺卡先生叫着，抓住他的一只手，用惊人的力气使劲地上下摇着，“我亲
爱的小朋友，看见你太好了！真高兴！真荣幸！你能和我们在一起，真叫人喜出望外！这两
位是你的爸爸妈妈吗？太好了！进来吧！进来吧！对了！走过大门！”
旺卡先生显然和其他人同样兴奋。
“我的姓名，”第二个走上前的孩子说，“叫维鲁卡•索尔特。”
“我亲爱的维鲁卡，你好吗？这是多么高兴的事啊！你的确有个有趣的名字，不是吗？我
一直以为维鲁卡是脚底的鸡眼！但我一定错了，对不对？你穿上这件可爱的貂皮大衣多么漂
亮啊！我真高兴你能来！天哪，这将是一个多么令人兴奋的日子！我衷心希望你喜欢这日
子！我肯定你会的！我知道你会的！这一位是你的爸爸？你好，索尔特先生！这位是索尔特
太太？看到你真叫我喜出望外！对，这张奖券完全对！请进来！”
接下来的两个孩子——维奥莉特•博雷加德和迈克•蒂维——走上前让他检查奖券，他们的
手臂被力大无穷的旺卡先生摇啊摇啊，摇得那手臂简直要从他们的肩上落下来了。
最后，一个紧张的细小声音轻轻说了一声：“查理•巴克特。”
“查理！”旺卡先生叫道，“很好，很好，很好！你来了！你是昨天才找到这张奖券的，对
吗？不错，不错。全部经过我还是看今天早晨的报纸才知道的！正好赶上，我亲爱的小朋
友！我太高兴了！太为你高兴了！这一位呢？是你的爷爷？很高兴看到你，老先生！大喜过
望！大喜若狂！大喜若醉！很好！好极了！现在全都进来了吗，五个小朋友？对，很好！现
在请你们跟我走！我们的参观这就要开始，但一定要走在一起！请不要独自走开！我不希望
在这次参观过程中失去你们中的任何一位！噢，天哪，不要让这种事发生！”
查理回过头去，看到大铁门在他后面慢慢地关上。外面的人群仍旧在推搡叫喊。查理看
了他们最后一眼。接着铁门哐当一声关上，外面的景象便完全看不见了。
“我们走吧！”走在整队人前面的旺卡先生叫道，“请你们从这道红色大门进去！这就对
了！里面又舒服又温暖！工厂里必须保持温暖，这是为了工人！我的工人习惯极高的温度！
这么冷的天气他们受不了！他们在这种气候里到室外是会送命的！他们会冻死！”
“可是这些工人是谁？”奥古斯塔斯•格卢普问道。
“到时候你会知道的，我亲爱的小朋友！”旺卡先生对奥古斯塔斯微笑着说，“耐心点，我
们一路走，你什么都会看到！大家都进来了吗？好！我关上门你们不介意吧？谢谢！”
查理•巴克特发现自己正站在一条长长的走廊上，这条走廊在他前面延伸，看不到尽头。
走廊宽得可以容纳一辆汽车轻易地行驶。墙是淡淡的粉红色的，灯光柔和悦目。
“多么可爱，多么温暖啊！”查理悄悄地说。
“是啊，而且气味多么香！”约瑟夫爷爷深吸了一口气回答说。世界上所有最好的气味似
乎都在他们周围的空气中混合起来了——烤咖啡、焦糖、融化的巧克力、薄荷、紫罗兰、压
碎的榛子、苹果花、蜜糖、柠檬皮等等的气味……
远处，从这家大工厂的心脏，传来隐隐约约的发动机的轰鸣声，好像有一部巨型机器正
用惊人的速度在旋转它的轮子。
“这一条，我亲爱的小朋友们，”旺卡先生把他的声音提高到所有声音之上说，“这一条是
主要通道。请把你们的外衣和帽子挂在那边的衣钩上，然后跟着我走。就是这样！很好！大
家准备好了！那么来吧，我们走！”他快步顺着走廊向前走，桃红色天鹅绒燕尾服的燕尾在他
背后摆动，客人们全都急急忙忙地跟着他走。
要是想一想，这群人的人数可不少，有九个大人和五个孩子，一共十四个人。因此可以
想象，他们急急忙忙地顺着通道走时，为了赶上前面那个快步如飞的小个子，常常免不了推
推搡搡。“来吧！”旺卡先生叫道，“请走快点！这样慢腾腾的，我们今天就没法看完了！”
他很快就从主要通道向右转入一条稍窄的通道。
接着他向左转。
接着再向左转。
接着向右转。
接着向左转。
接着向右转。
接着再向右转。
接着向左转。
这地方活像一个巨大的兔窟，一条条通道通到这边，通到那边，通到四面八方。
“别松开我的手，查理。”约瑟夫爷爷轻声说。
“请注意，这些通道全都斜向下面！”旺卡先生高声地说，“我们现在正向地底下走！我这
家工厂最重要的车间都在地下深处！”
“为什么要这样？”有人问道。
“在地面上空间几乎不够！”旺卡先生回答说，“我们要去看的车间都很大！它们比足球场
还要大！世界上没有一座建筑物能容下这些车间！但在这里的地底下，我有所有我需要的空
间。它是无限的——只要我挖就行。”
旺卡先生向右转。
他向左转。
他又向右转。
通道斜下去，现在越来越陡，越来越陡。
旺卡先生忽然停下来，在他面前是一道闪亮的金属门。这群人围住它。门上用大字写
着：
巧克力车间
15 The Chocolate Room
15 The Chocolate Room
‘An important room, this!’ cried Mr Wonka, taking a bunch of keys from his pocket and
slipping one into the keyhole of the door. ‘This is the nerve centre of the whole factory,
the heart of the whole business! And so beautiful! I insist upon my rooms being beautiful!
I can’t abide ugliness in factories! In we go, then! But do be careful, my dear children!
Don’t lose your heads! Don’t get over-excited! Keep very calm!’
Mr Wonka opened the door. Five children and nine grown-ups pushed their ways in -
and oh, what an amazing sight it was that now met their eyes!
They were looking down upon a lovely valley. There were green meadows on either
side of the valley, and along the bottom of it there flowed a great brown river.
What is more, there was a tremendous waterfall halfway along the river - a steep cliff
over which the water curled and rolled in a solid sheet, and then went crashing down
into a boiling churning whirlpool of froth and spray.
Below the waterfall (and this was the most
astonishing sight of all), a whole mass of enormous glass pipes were dangling down
into the river from somewhere high up in the ceiling! They really were enormous, those
pipes. There must have been a dozen of them at least, and they were sucking up the
brownish muddy water from the river and carrying it away to goodness knows where.
And because they were made of glass, you could see the liquid flowing and bubbling
along inside them, and above the noise of the waterfall, you could hear the never-ending
suck-suck-sucking sound of the pipes as they did their work.
Graceful trees and bushes were growing along the riverbanks - weeping willows and
alders and tall clumps of rhododendrons with their pink and red and mauve blossoms. In
the meadows there were thousands of buttercups.
‘ There!’ cried Mr Wonka, dancing up and down and pointing his gold-topped cane at
the great brown river. ‘It’s all chocolate! Every drop of that river is hot melted chocolate
of the finest quality. The very finest quality. There’s enough chocolate in there to fill
every bathtub in the entire country! And all the swimming pools as well! Isn’t it terrific?
And just look at my pipes! They suck up the chocolate and carry it away to all the other
rooms in the factory where it is needed! Thousands of gallons an hour, my dear children!
Thousands and thousands of gallons!’
The children and their parents were too flabbergasted to speak. They were staggered.
They were dumbfounded. They were bewildered and dazzled. They were completely
bowled over by the hugeness of the whole thing. They simply stood and stared.
‘The waterfall is most important!’ Mr Wonka went on. ‘It mixes the chocolate! It
churns it up! It pounds it and beats it! It makes it light and frothy! No other factory in
the world mixes its chocolate by waterfall! But it’s the only way to do it properly! The
only way! And do you like my trees?’ he cried, pointing with his stick. ‘And my lovely
bushes? Don’t you think they look pretty? I told you I hated ugliness! And of course they
are all eatable! All made of something different and delicious! And do you like my
meadows? Do you like my grass and my buttercups? The grass you are standing on, my
dear little ones, is made of a new kind of soft, minty sugar that I’ve just invented! I call
it swudge! Try a blade! Please do! It’s delectable!’
Automatically, everybody bent down and picked one blade of grass - everybody, that
is, except Augustus Gloop, who took a big handful.
And Violet Beauregarde, before tasting her blade of grass, took the piece of world-
record-breaking chewing-gum out of her mouth and stuck it carefully behind her ear.
‘Isn’t it wonderful!’ whispered Charlie. ‘Hasn’t it got a wonderful taste, Grandpa?’
‘I could eat the whole field!’ said Grandpa Joe, grinning with delight. T could go
around on all fours like a cow and eat every blade of grass in the field!’
‘Try a buttercup!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘They’re even nicer!’
Suddenly, the air was filled with screams of excitement. The screams came from
Veruca Salt. She was pointing frantically to the other side of the river. ‘Look! Look over
there!’ she screamed. ‘What is it? He’s moving! He’s walking! It’s a little person! It’s a
little man!. Down there below the waterfall!’
Everybody stopped picking buttercups and stared across the river.
‘She’s right, Grandpa!’ cried Charlie. ‘It is a little man! Can you see him?’
‘I see him, Charlie!’ said Grandpa Joe excitedly.
And now everybody started shouting at once.
‘There’s two of them!’
‘My gosh, so there is!’
‘There’s more than two! There’s one, two, three, four, five!’
‘What are they doing?’
‘Where do they come from?’
‘Who are they?’
Children and parents alike rushed down to the edge of the river to get a closer look.
‘Aren’t they fantastic!’
‘No higher than my knee!’
‘Look at their funny long hair!’
The tiny men - they were no larger than medium-sized dolls - had stopped what they
were doing, and now they were staring back across the river at the visitors. One of them
pointed towards the children, and then he whispered something to the other four, and
all five of them burst into peals of laughter.
‘But they can’t be real people,’ Charlie said.
‘Of course they’re real people,’ Mr Wonka answered. ‘They’re Oompa-Loompas.’
15　巧克力车间
15　巧克力车间
“这是一个重要车间！”旺卡先生一面大声说着，一面从衣袋里掏出一串钥匙，把其中一
把塞到这道门的钥匙孔里去，“这是整座工厂的神经中枢，是整个事业的心脏！它是那么漂
亮！我坚持要使我的车间全都漂漂亮亮！我不能容忍工厂丑陋难看！好，我们进去吧！但必
须小心，我亲爱的小朋友们！别冲动！别过分兴奋！要保持十分冷静！”
旺卡先生推开门。五个孩子和九个大人一路进去——噢，现在他们看见的是多么惊人的
景象啊！
他们正低头看着一个可爱的谷地。谷地两旁是翠绿的草地，顺着谷底流着一条棕色的大
河。
不但这样，河上有一道巨大的瀑布，上面是一个陡峭的悬崖，悬崖上的溶液像块大钢片
那样弯曲着，随即哗哗地直泻而下，落到一个泡沫飞溅的滚烫的旋涡里。
瀑布底下（这是最使人叹为观止的奇观），一整套巨型玻璃管从天花板高处悬挂下来，
插入河中。那些玻璃管确实是巨型的。它们至少有一打之多，把棕色的泥水从河中吸上去，
送到老天才知道的什么地方。因为管子是玻璃的，可以看到液体在管内流动、起泡，还可以
听到管子不停吸水的唧唧声，比瀑布的喧腾声更响。
沿着河岸生长着美丽的高大树木和矮树丛，有垂柳、桤木和一丛丛高高的杜鹃花，开着
粉红的、大红的和紫红的花。草地上有千万棵金凤花。
“那里！”旺卡先生叫道，他蹦蹦跳跳着，用他那根金头手杖指着棕色的大河，“全是巧克
力！这条河的每一滴都是质量一流的热巧克力溶液。质量是最好的。河里的巧克力足够装满
全国的每一个浴缸！还有所有的游泳池！是不是多极了？就看看我那些玻璃管吧！它们吸进
巧克力后，便把它送到工厂里所有需要它的车间去！一小时几千升呢，我亲爱的小朋友们！
几千几万升啊！”
孩子们和他们的家长全都目瞪口呆，说不出话来。他们都站不稳。他们都成了哑巴。他
们都头昏眼花。他们被整个装置的宏大规模惊呆了。他们就这样站着，凝视着。
“瀑布是最重要的！”旺卡先生说下去，“它调拌巧克力！它搅拌它！它捣它！它使它变
薄！世界上没有别的工厂是用瀑布来调制巧克力的！但只有这个办法才能调匀，这是唯一的
办法！你们喜欢我的大树吗？”他用手杖指点着叫道，“还有我那些可爱的矮树丛？你们不觉
得它们很漂亮吗？我告诉过你们，我讨厌丑陋难看！当然，那些大树和矮树丛都是可以吃
的！它们全由不同的好吃的东西做成！你们喜欢我的草地吗？你们喜欢我的青草和金凤花
吗？我亲爱的小朋友们，你们正站在上面的青草，是用我刚发明的一种新的薄荷味软糖做成
的！我叫它‘司华芝糖’！摘一片尝尝吧！请！它是美味可口的！”
每个人都不自觉地弯下腰来采一片草叶——每个人都采一片，除了奥古斯塔斯•格卢普，
他不是采一片，而是采了一大把。
维奥莉特•博雷加德在尝她那片草叶之前，先从嘴里拿出她那片打破世界记录的口香糖，
小心地把它贴在耳朵后面。
“好吃极了，不是吗？”查理低声说，“它的味道是不是好极了，爷爷？”
“我恨不得把整块草地的青草都吃掉！”约瑟夫爷爷兴高采烈地笑着说，“我恨不得像牛一
样，低下头把草地上每一片草叶都吃掉！”
“请尝尝金凤花吧！”旺卡先生叫道，“它们还要好吃！”
空气中一下子充满了兴奋的尖叫声。这尖叫声来自维鲁卡•索尔特。她正发疯似的指着河
的对岸。“瞧！瞧那边！”她尖叫道，“那是什么？他在动！他在走路！那是一个小矮人！那是
一个小矮男人！就在瀑布底下！”
所有人停止采金凤花，向对岸望去。
“她说得对，爷爷！”查理叫道，“那是一个小矮男人！你看见他了吗？”
“我看见了，查理！”约瑟夫爷爷兴奋地说。
现在所有的人同时叫起来。
“有两个！”
“天哪，在那边！”
“不止两个！是一、二、三、四、五，五个！”
“他们在干什么？”
“他们是从哪里来的？”
“他们是谁？”
孩子们和家长不约而同地冲下河边，要靠近一点儿看。
“他们真是很不可思议，不是吗？”
“还不到我的膝盖高！”
“瞧他们滑稽的长头发！”
那些小矮人——比中号的洋娃娃还要小——这时已经放下工作，从河对岸看着这边的客
人。其中一个指着孩子们对其余四个悄悄地说了句什么，五个人都一起哈哈大笑起来。
“但他们不可能是真正的人。”查理说。
“他们当然是真正的人，”旺卡先生回答说，“他们是奥帕—伦帕人。”
16 The Oompa-Loompas
16 The Oompa-Loompas
‘Oompa-Loompas!’ everyone said at once. ‘Oompa-Loompas!’
‘Imported direct from Loompaland,’ said Mr Wonka proudly.
‘There’s no such place,’ said Mrs Salt.
‘Excuse me, dear lady, but…’
‘Mr Wonka,’ cried Mrs Salt. ‘I’m a teacher of geography…’
‘Then you’ll know all about it,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘And oh, what a terrible country it is!
Nothing but thick jungles infested by the most dangerous beasts in the world -
hornswogglers and snozzwangers and those terrible wicked whangdoodles. A whang-
doodle would eat ten Oompa- Loompas for breakfast and come galloping back for a
second helping. When I went out there, I found the little Oompa-Loompas living in tree
houses. They had to live in tree houses to escape from the whangdoodles and the
hornswogglers and the snozzwangers. And they were living on green caterpillars, and
the caterpillars tasted revolting, and the Oompa-Loompas spent every moment of their
days climbing through the treetops looking for other things to mash up with the
caterpillars to make them taste better - red beetles, for instance, and eucalyptus leaves,
and the bark of the bong-bong tree, all of them beastly, but not quite so beastly as the
caterpillars. Poor little Oompa-Loompas! The one food that they longed for more than
any other was the cacao bean. But they couldn’t get it. An Oompa-Loompa was lucky if
he found three or four cacao beans a year. But oh, how they craved them. They used to
dream about cacao beans all night and talk about them all day. You had only to mention
the word “cacao” to an Oompa-Loompa and he would start dribbling at the mouth. The
cacao bean,’ Mr Wonka continued, ‘which grows on the cacao tree, happens to be the
thing from which all chocolate is made. You cannot make chocolate without the
cacao bean. The cacao bean is chocolate. I myself use billions of cacao beans every
week in this factory. And so, my dear children, as soon as I discovered that the Oompa-
Loompas were crazy about this particular food, I climbed up to their tree-house village
and poked my head in through the door of the tree house belonging to the leader of the
tribe. The poor little fellow, looking thin and starved, was sitting there trying to eat a
bowl full of mashed- up green caterpillars without being sick. “Look here,” I said
(speaking not in English, of course, but in Oompa-Loompish), “look here, if you and all
your people will come back to my country and live in my factory, you can have all the
cacao beans you want! I’ve got mountains of them in my storehouses! You can have
cacao beans for every meal! You can gorge yourselves silly on them! I’ll even pay your
wages in cacao beans if you wish!”
‘ “You really mean it?” asked the Oompa-Loompa leader, leaping up from his chair.
‘ “Of course I mean it,” I said. “And you can have chocolate as well. Chocolate tastes
even better than cacao beans because it’s got milk and sugar added.”
‘The little man gave a great whoop of joy and threw his bowl of mashed caterpillars
right out of the tree-house window. “It’s a deal!” he cried. “Come on! Let’s go!”
‘So I shipped them all over here, every man, woman, and child in the Oompa-Loompa
tribe. It was easy. I smuggled them over in large packing cases with holes in them, and
they all got here safely. They are wonderful workers. They all speak English now. They
love dancing and music. They are always making up songs. I expect you will hear a good
deal of singing today from time to time. I must warn you, though, that they are rather
mischievous. They like jokes. They still wear the same kind of clothes they wore in the
jungle. They insist upon that. The men, as you can see for yourselves across the river,
wear only deerskins. The women wear leaves, and the children wear nothing at all. The
women use fresh leaves every day…’
‘Daddy!’ shouted Veruca Salt (the girl who got everything she wanted). ‘Daddy! I want
an Oompa-Loompa! I want you to get me an Oompa-Loompa! I want an Oompa-Loompa
right away! I want to take it home with me! Go on, Daddy! Get me an Oompa-Loompa!’
‘Now, now, my pet!’ her father said to her, ‘we mustn’t interrupt Mr Wonka.’
‘But I want an Oompa-Loompa!’ screamed Veruca.
‘All right, Veruca, all right. But I can’t get it for you this second. Please be patient. I’ll
see you have one before the day is out.’
‘Augustus!’ shouted Mrs Gloop. ‘Augustus, sweetheart, I don’t think you had better do
that.’ Augustus Gloop, as you might have guessed, had quietly sneaked down to the edge
of the river, and he was now kneeling on the riverbank, scooping hot melted chocolate
into his mouth as fast as he could.
16　奥帕—伦帕人
16　奥帕—伦帕人
“奥帕—伦帕人！”大家不约而同地说，“奥帕—伦帕人！”
“直接从伦帕地区进口的。”旺卡先生自豪地说。
“没有这样一个地方。”索尔特太太说。
“对不起，亲爱的女士，但是……”
“旺卡先生，”索尔特太太叫道，“我可是一个地理教师……”
“那么让你听一听，知道知道吧，”旺卡先生说，“噢，那是一个多么可怕的地方啊！那里
只有浓密的丛林，住满了世界上最危险的野兽——独角兽、怪鼻兽和一些可怕凶恶的丑怪
兽。一头丑怪兽一顿早餐可以吃十个奥帕—伦帕人，不够又跑回来再吃。我到那里去，看到
那些小奥帕—伦帕人住在树上的屋里。他们只好住在树屋里躲避独角兽、怪鼻兽和丑怪兽。
他们靠吃绿毛虫为生，毛虫的味道实在叫人恶心，于是奥帕—伦帕人整天在树梢上爬，找别
的东西来跟毛虫拌在一起捣碎了吃，使味道好一些，比方说红甲虫、桉树叶、梆梆树皮，全
都不好吃，但比毛虫好吃一些。可怜的小奥帕—伦帕人！在所有的食物中，他们最渴望吃到
的是可可豆，但是他们往往吃不到。一个奥帕—伦帕人一年能找到三四粒可可豆就算是幸运
的了。但是，他们多么渴望吃到可可豆啊！他们总是整夜在做可可豆的梦，整天在谈可可
豆。你只要对一个奥帕—伦帕人提到‘可可豆’，他就会流口水。可可豆，”旺卡先生说下
去，“长在可可树上，正好是制造巧克力的原料。没有可可豆就制造不成巧克力。可可豆就是
巧克力。我这家工厂每星期要用上亿万粒可可豆。因此，我亲爱的小朋友们，当我发现奥帕
—伦帕人爱这种食物爱得发狂时，我就爬上他们的树屋，把头伸到部落酋长家的门里。那可
怜的小家伙看上去又瘦又饿，正坐在屋里设法吃满满一碗绿毛虫糊而不作呕。‘你听我说，’我
对他说道（当然我用的不是英语而是奥帕—伦帕语），‘你听我说，如果你和你部落所有的人
都跟我到我的国家，住在我的工厂里，你们就能吃到所有你们要吃的可可豆！我的仓库里可
可豆堆积如山！你们每一餐都可以吃可可豆！你们可以大吃特吃！如果你们希望的话，我甚
至可以用可可豆来付你们的工钱！’
“‘你这话当真？’奥帕—伦帕酋长从他的椅子上跳起来问。
“‘当然是真的，’我说，‘你还可以吃巧克力糖。巧克力糖比可可豆的味道更好，因为它加
进了牛奶和糖。’
“那小矮人欢呼起来，把他那碗绿毛虫糊扔出了树屋的窗口。‘成交了！’他叫道，‘来！让
我们走吧！’
“于是我用船把奥帕—伦帕部落的每一个男人、女人和小孩全都运载到这里来。这件事情
很容易办。我把他们偷偷地放进开着洞的大行李箱。他们全都安全抵达这里。他们是出色的
工人。现在他们全讲英语了。他们爱舞蹈和音乐，常常自己编出歌来唱。我想你们今天会不
时听到他们唱歌。不过我必须叮嘱你们，他们十分淘气。他们还喜欢开玩笑。他们仍旧穿着
在丛林时穿的衣服，他们坚持这样做。那些男人只披鹿皮，正如你们在河对岸看到的那样。
女人披树叶，孩子们根本什么也不披，光着身子。女人每天要更换新鲜的树叶……”
“爸爸！”维鲁卡•索尔特（那个要什么有什么的小姑娘）叫道，“爸爸！我要一个奥帕—伦
帕人！我要你替我弄来一个奥帕—伦帕人！我这就要个奥帕—伦帕人！我要把他带回家！去
吧，爸爸，给我弄来一个奥帕—伦帕人！”
“好了，好了，我的宝贝！”她的爸爸对她说，“我们绝对不可以打断旺卡先生的话。”
“可我就是要一个奥帕—伦帕人嘛！”维鲁卡哇哇大叫。
“好吧，维鲁卡，好吧！不过这会儿我不能给你弄到一个。请你耐心一点儿。我保证你今
天一定有一个。”
“奥古斯塔斯！”格卢普先生叫道，“奥古斯塔斯，心肝儿，我认为你最好不要那样
做。”奥古斯塔斯•格卢普，正像各位可能猜到的，已经悄悄地溜到下面的河边。他现在正跪在
岸上，用双手捧起热巧克力溶液大喝特喝，喝得要多快有多快。
17 Augustus Gloop Goes up the Pipe
17 Augustus Gloop Goes up the Pipe
When Mr Wonka turned round and saw what Augustus Gloop was doing, he cried out,
‘Oh, no! Please, Augustus, please! I beg of you not to do that. My chocolate must be
untouched by human hands!’
‘Augustus!’ called out Mrs Gloop. ‘Didn’t you hear what the man said? Come away
from that river at once!’
‘This stuff is fabulous!’ said Augustus, taking not the slightest notice of his mother or
Mr Wonka. ‘Gosh, I need a bucket to drink it properly!’
‘Augustus,’ cried Mr Wonka, hopping up and down and waggling his stick in the air,
‘you must come away. You are dirtying my chocolate!’
‘Augustus!’ cried Mrs Gloop.
‘Augustus!’ cried Mr Gloop.
But Augustus was deaf to everything except the call of his enormous stomach. He was
now lying full length on the ground with his head far out over the river, lapping up the
chocolate like a dog.
‘Augustus!’ shouted Mrs Gloop. ‘You’ll be giving that nasty cold of yours to about a
million people all over the country!’
‘Be careful, Augustus!’ shouted Mr Gloop. ‘You’re leaning too far out!’
Mr Gloop was absolutely right. For suddenly there was a shriek, and then a splash,
and into the river went Augustus Gloop, and in one second he had disappeared under
the brown surface.
‘Save him!’ screamed Mrs Gloop, going white in the face, and waving her umbrella
about. ‘He’ll drown! He can’t swim a yard! Save him! Save him!’
‘Good heavens, woman,’ said Mr Gloop, ‘I’m not diving in there! I’ve got my best suit
on!’
Augustus Gloop’s face came up again to the surface, painted brown with chocolate.
‘Help! Help! Help!’ he yelled. ‘Fish me out!’
‘Don’t just stand there!’ Mrs Gloop screamed at Mr Gloop. ‘Do something!’
‘I am doing something!’ said Mr Gloop, who was now taking off his jacket and getting
ready to dive into the chocolate. But while he was doing this, the wretched boy was
being sucked closer and closer towards the mouth of one of the great pipes that was
dangling down into the river. Then all at once, the powerful suction took hold of him
completely, and he was pulled under the surface and then into the mouth of the pipe.
The crowd on the riverbank waited breathlessly to see where he would come out.
‘There he goes!’ somebody shouted, pointing upwards.
And sure enough, because the pipe was made of glass, Augustus Gloop could be
clearly seen shooting up inside it, head first, like a torpedo.
‘Help! Murder! Police!’ screamed Mrs Gloop. ‘Augustus, come back at once! Where are
you going?’
‘It’s a wonder to me,’ said Mr Gloop, ‘how that pipe is big enough for him to go
through it.’
‘It isn’t big enough!’ said Charlie Bucket. ‘Oh dear, look! He’s slowing down!’
‘So he is!’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘He’s going to stick!’ said Charlie.
‘I think he is!’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘By golly, he has stuck!’ said Charlie.
‘It’s his stomach that’s done it!’ said Mr Gloop.
‘He’s blocked the whole pipe!’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘Smash the pipe!’ yelled Mrs Gloop, still waving her umbrella. ‘Augustus, come out of
there at once!’
The watchers below could see the chocolate swishing around the boy in the pipe, and
they could see it building up behind him in a solid mass, pushing against the blockage.
The pressure was terrific. Something had to give. Something did give, and that
something was Augustus. WHOOF! Up he shot again like a bullet in the barrel of a gun.
‘He’s disappeared!’ yelled Mrs Gloop. ‘Where does that pipe go to? Quick! Call the fire
brigade!’
‘Keep calm!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Keep calm, my dear lady, keep calm. There is no
danger! No danger whatsoever! Augustus has gone on a little journey, that’s all. A most
interesting little journey. But he’ll come out of it just fine, you wait and see.’
‘How can he possibly come out just fine!’ snapped Mrs Gloop. ‘He’ll be made into
marshmallows in five seconds!’
‘Impossible!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Unthinkable! Inconceivable! Absurd! He could never
be made into marshmallows!’
‘And why not, may I ask?’ shouted Mrs Gloop.
‘Because that pipe doesn’t go anywhere near it! That pipe - the one Augustus went up
happens to lead directly to the room where I make a most delicious kind of strawberry-
flavoured chocolate-coated fudge…’
‘Then he’ll be made into strawberry-flavoured chocolate-coated fudge!’ screamed Mrs
Gloop. ‘My poor Augustus! They’ll be selling him by the pound all over the country
tomorrow morning!’
‘Quite right,’ said Mr Gloop.
‘I know I’m right,’ said Mrs Gloop.
‘It’s beyond a joke,’ said Mr Gloop.
‘Mr Wonka doesn’t seem to think so!’ cried Mrs Gloop. ‘Just look at him! He’s
laughing his head off! How dare you laugh like that when my boy’s just gone up the
pipe! You monster!’ she shrieked, pointing her umbrella at Mr Wonka as though she
were going to run him through. ‘You think it’s a joke, do you? You think that sucking my
boy up into your Fudge Room like that is just one great big colossal joke?’
‘He’ll be perfectly safe,’ said Mr Wonka, giggling slightly.
‘He’ll be chocolate fudge!’ shrieked Mrs Gloop.
‘Never!’ cried Mr Wonka.
‘Of course he will!’ shrieked Mrs Gloop.
‘I wouldn’t allow it!’ cried Mr Wonka.
‘And why not?’ shrieked Mrs Gloop.
‘Because the taste would be terrible,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Just imagine it! Augustus-
flavoured chocolate-coated Gloop! No one would buy it.’
‘They most certainly would!’ cried Mr Gloop indignantly.
‘I don’t want to think about it!’ shrieked Mrs Gloop.
‘Nor do I,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘And I do promise you, madam, that your darling boy is
perfectly safe.’
‘If he’s perfectly safe, then where is he?’ snapped Mrs Gloop. ‘Lead me to him this
instant!’
Mr Wonka turned around and clicked his fingers sharply, click, click, click, three times.
Immediately, an Oompa-Loompa appeared, as if from nowhere, and stood beside him.
The Oompa-Loompa bowed and smiled, showing beautiful white teeth. His skin was
rosy-white, his long hair was golden-brown, and the top of his head came just above the
height of Mr Wonka’s knee. He wore the usual deerskin slung over his shoulder.
‘Now listen to me!’ said Mr Wonka, looking down at the tiny man. ‘I want you to take
Mr and Mrs Gloop up to the Fudge Room and help them to find their son, Augustus. He’s
just gone up the pipe.’
The Oompa-Loompa took one look at Mrs Gloop and exploded into peals of laughter.
‘Oh, do be quiet!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Control yourself! Pull yourself together! Mrs Gloop
doesn’t think it’s at all funny!’
‘You can say that again!’ said Mrs Gloop.
‘Go straight to the Fudge Room,’ Mr Wonka said to the Oompa-Loompa, ‘and when
you get there, take a long stick and start poking around inside the big chocolate-mixing
barrel. I’m almost certain you’ll find him in there. But you’d better look sharp! You’ll
have to hurry! If you leave him in the chocolate-mixing barrel too long, he’s liable to get
poured out into the fudge boiler, and that really would be a disaster, wouldn’t it? My
fudge would become quite uneatable!’
Mrs Gloop let out a shriek of fury.
‘I’m joking,’ said Mr Wonka, giggling madly behind his beard. ‘I didn’t mean it.
Forgive me. I’m so sorry. Good-bye, Mrs Gloop! And Mr Gloop! Good-bye! I’ll see you
later…’
As Mr and Mrs Gloop and their tiny escort hurried away, the five Oompa-Loompas on
the far side of the river suddenly began hopping and dancing about and beating wildly
upon a number of very small drums. ‘Augustus Gloop!’ they chanted. ‘Augustus Gloop!
Augustus Gloop! Augustus Gloop!’
‘Grandpa!’ cried Charlie. ‘Listen to them, Grandpa! What are they doing?’
‘Ssshh!’ whispered Grandpa Joe. ‘I think they’re going to sing us a song!’
‘Augustus Gloop!’ chanted the Oompa-Loompas.
‘Augustus Gloop! Augustus Gloop!
The great big greedy nincompoop!
How long could we allow this beast
To gorge and guzzle, feed and feast
On everything he wanted to?
Great Scott! It simply wouldn’t do!
However long this pig might live,
We’re positive he’d never give
Even the smallest bit of fun
Or happiness to anyone.
So what we do in cases such
As this, we use the gentle touch,
And carefully we take the brat
And turn him into something that
Will give great pleasure to us all -
A doll, for instance, or a ball,
Or marbles or a rocking horse.
But this revolting boy, of course,
Was so unutterably vile,
So greedy, foul, and infantile,
He left a most disgusting taste
Inside our mouths, and so in haste
We chose a thing that, come what may,
Would take the nasty taste away.
“Come on!” we cried. “The time is ripe
To send him shooting up the pipe!
He has to go! It has to be!”
And very soon, he’s going to see
Inside the room to which he’s gone
Some funny things are going on.
But don’t, dear children, be alarmed;
Augustus Gloop will not be harmed,
Although, of course, we must admit
He will be altered quite a bit.
He’ll be quite changed from what he’s been,
When he goes through the fudge machine:
Slowly, the wheels go round and round,
The cogs begin to grind and pound;
A hundred knives go slice, slice, slice;
We add some sugar, cream, and spice;
We boil him for a minute more,
Until we’re absolutely sure
That all the greed and all the gall
Is boiled away for once and all.
Then out he comes! And now! By grace!
A miracle has taken place!
This boy, who only just before
Was loathed by men from shore to shore,
This greedy brute, this louse’s ear,
Is loved by people everywhere!
For who could hate or bear a grudge
Against a luscious bit of fudge?’
‘I told you they loved singing!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Aren’t they delightful? Aren’t they
charming? But you mustn’t believe a word they said. It’s all nonsense, every bit of it!’
‘Are the Oompa-Loompas really joking, Grandpa?’ asked Charlie.
‘Of course they’re joking,’ answered Grandpa Joe. ‘They must be joking. At least, I
hope they’re joking. Don’t you?’
17　奥古斯塔斯升上了玻璃管
17　奥古斯塔斯升上了玻璃管
旺卡先生一转脸看到奥古斯塔斯•格卢普，马上高声大叫：“噢，不行！请不要这样做，奥
古斯塔斯，请不要这样做！我求求你不要这样做。我的巧克力不可以用手碰的！”
“奥古斯塔斯！”格卢普太太也叫起来，“你没有听见这位先生的话吗？马上离开那条
河！”
“这东西好吃极了！”奥古斯塔斯说，一点儿也不理会他的妈妈或者旺卡先生，“噢，我需
要一只水桶，好喝个痛快！”
“奥古斯塔斯，”旺卡先生蹦着跳着，把手杖在空中乱挥，大声喝道，“你必须离开。你把
我的巧克力弄脏了！”
“奥古斯塔斯！”格卢普太太叫道。
“奥古斯塔斯！”格卢普先生叫道。
但是奥古斯塔斯除了听他那个大肚子的召唤以外，什么也听不见。这时他趴在地上伸直
身子，把头使劲地伸到河中去，像狗那样在舔巧克力。
“奥古斯塔斯！”格卢普太太叫道，“你会把你那讨厌的伤风传染给全国一百万人的！”
“小心，奥古斯塔斯！”格卢普先生叫道，“你伸出去太远了！”
格卢普先生的话绝对没错，因为一下子就传来一声尖叫，接着是扑通一声，奥古斯塔斯•
格卢普落到河里去了，转眼间已经消失在棕色的河面下。
“快去救他！”格卢普太太哇哇大叫，脸都白了，挥动着她的雨伞，“他会淹死的！他连一
米也游不到！你快去救他呀！你快去救他的命啊！”
“天哪，你这女人，”格卢普先生说，“我不打算跳下去！我穿着最好的衣服！”
这时奥古斯塔斯•格卢普的脸重新露出河面，满脸是棕色的巧克力。“救命啊！救命啊！救
命啊！”他高声叫道，“把我拉上去呀！”
“不要光站在那里不动！”格卢普太太对格卢普先生大声说，“采取行动啊！”
“我是在采取行动啊！”格卢普先生说，他这时正在脱他的西装上衣，准备跳到巧克力河
里去。但他还在脱衣服的时候，那倒霉的孩子已经被愈来愈近地吸到从上面垂下来的一根大
玻璃管的管口。猛一下子，强大的吸力完全吸住了他，把他吸到河面下，接着吸到管口里去
了。
河边的一伙人屏住气息，等着看他会从什么地方出来。
“他到那里去了！”有人指着上面大叫。
一点儿不错，因为管子是玻璃的，可以清楚地看到奥古斯塔斯•格卢普在玻璃管里面飞快
地升上去，头朝上，像一个鱼雷。
“救命啊！这是谋杀！快叫警察！”格卢普太太大叫大嚷，“奥古斯塔斯，马上回来！你要
上哪里去呀？”
“我倒弄不懂，”格卢普先生说，“那玻璃管怎么大到能让他通过？”
“是不够大！”查理•巴克特说，“天哪，瞧！他慢下来了！”
“是慢下来了！”约瑟夫爷爷说。
“他要卡住了！”查理说。
“我想他要卡住了！”约瑟夫爷爷说。
“天哪！他已经卡住了！”查理说。
“这都因为他那个肚子！”格卢普先生说。
“他堵住了整根玻璃管！”约瑟夫爷爷说。
“敲碎那根玻璃管！”格卢普太太大叫，仍旧在挥动着她的雨伞，“奥古斯塔斯，你马上从
那里面出来！”
在下面围观的人可以看到，玻璃管里的巧克力在孩子周围打转。他们可以看到孩子把巧
克力溶液的去路堵住了，巧克力溶液在他的身后积聚成结实的一团，冲击着堵住它去路的东
西。冲力异常厉害。堵住它的玩意儿必须让路。堵住它的玩意儿是让路了，那玩意儿正是奥
古斯塔斯。呜！他又像颗出膛的子弹那样给射了上去。
“他不见了！”格卢普太太大叫，“那根玻璃管通到哪里去？快！快叫消防队！”
“保持镇静！”旺卡先生高声叫道，“保持镇静，我亲爱的女士，保持镇静。不会有危险
的！无论如何不会有危险！奥古斯塔斯只是去作一次小小的旅行，只不过是这样。一次最有
趣的小小旅行！但他会安全出来的，你就等着瞧好了！”
“他怎么可能安全出来呀？”格卢普太太生气地说，“五秒钟他就要被制成果汁软糖了！”
“不可能！”旺卡先生叫道，“难以想象！不可思议！荒唐透顶！他永远不可能被制成果汁
软糖！”
“我倒要请教，为什么不可能？”格卢普太太叫道。
“因为那根玻璃管根本不通到制果汁软糖的地方！奥古斯塔斯所进的那根玻璃管正好一直
通到我制造最好吃的草莓牛奶巧克力夹心软糖的地方。”
“那么他就要被制成草莓牛奶巧克力夹心软糖了！”格卢普太太尖叫道，“我可怜的奥古斯
塔斯！明天早晨，他们就要把他一块一块地在全国各地出售了！”
“一点儿不错。”格卢普先生说。
“我知道我不会错的。”格卢普太太说。
“这不是开玩笑的事。”格卢普先生说。
“旺卡先生似乎不这样想！”格卢普太太叫道，“就看看他那副样子吧！他哈哈狂笑！我的
儿子到玻璃管里去了，你怎么还笑成这样！你这魔鬼！”她尖叫着，用雨伞指住了旺卡先生，
好像要把他戳穿似的。“你以为这是开玩笑吗，啊？你以为把我的儿子这样吸到你的牛奶巧克
力车间去只是一个特大的玩笑吗？”她喊道。
“他将安全无恙。”旺卡先生轻轻地咯咯笑着说。
“他将成为草莓牛奶巧克力夹心软糖！”格卢普太太尖叫道。
“永远不会！”旺卡先生叫道。
“他当然会！”格卢普太太尖叫道。
“我不能让他成为草莓牛奶巧克力夹心软糖！”旺卡先生叫道。
“为什么不能？”格卢普太太尖叫道。
“因为那味道太可怕了，”旺卡先生说，“只要想想，奥古斯塔斯味巧克力夹心格卢普！没
有人会买。”
“他们一定买！”格卢普先生气愤地叫道。
“我不愿去想这件事！”格卢普太太尖叫道。
“我也不愿，”旺卡先生说，“我向你保证，太太，你的宝贝儿子会绝对安全的。”
“如果他绝对安全，那么他在哪里？”格卢普太太厉声说，“马上带我到他那里去！”
旺卡先生转身弹响他的手指，咔哒，咔哒，咔哒，一共三下。一个奥帕—伦帕人马上出
现，就像从地里钻出来一样，站在他的旁边。
那个奥帕—伦帕人鞠躬微笑，露出好看的雪白牙齿。他的皮肤白里透红，长头发是金棕
色，头顶只到旺卡先生的膝盖。他的肩上照常披着一块鹿皮。
“现在你听我说！”旺卡先生低头看着小矮人说，“我要你把格卢普先生和他太太带到草莓
牛奶巧克力夹心软糖车间，帮他们找到他们的儿子奥古斯塔斯。他刚到玻璃管上面去了。”
这个奥帕—伦帕人看了格卢普太太一眼，爆发出一阵阵哈哈大笑声。
“噢，别笑！”旺卡先生说，“控制住自己！镇静下来，格卢普太太并不认为这件事有什么
好笑！”
“这话没错！”格卢普太太说。
“直接上草莓牛奶巧克力夹心软糖车间去，”旺卡先生对奥帕—伦帕人说，“到了那里，你
拿一根长棍子在调制巧克力的大桶里捞，我几乎可以断定，你会在里面找到他。不过你最好
抓紧时间，你必须快！如果让他在巧克力调制桶里待得太久，他有可能被倒进牛奶软糖锅
炉，那就真会闯大祸了。那样，我的牛奶软糖也就完全不能吃了！”
格卢普太太发出一声怒吼。
“我只是说句笑话，”旺卡先生用胡子捂住嘴拼命咯咯地笑着说，“我不是当真的，请你原
谅。我很抱歉。再见，格卢普太太！还有你，格卢普先生，再见！过会儿见……”
当格卢普先生、格卢普太太和陪同他们的小矮人匆匆离去以后，河对岸那五个奥帕—伦
帕人忽然开始又跳又舞，疯狂地敲起了几面很小的鼓。“奥古斯塔斯•格卢普！”他们唱道，“奥
古斯塔斯•格卢普！奥古斯塔斯•格卢普！奥古斯塔斯•格卢普！”
“爷爷！”查理叫道，“你听，爷爷！他们在干什么？”
“嘘嘘嘘！”约瑟夫爷爷低声说，“我想他们要唱一首歌给我们听！”
奥帕—伦帕人唱起来：
奥古斯塔斯•格卢普！
奥古斯塔斯•格卢普！
奥古斯塔斯•格卢普！
那头贪吃的大笨猪！
我们要容忍到哪一天，
让这个小野兽大吃大喝、狼吞虎咽，
要吃什么就吃个不停，
天哪！这可绝对不行！
不管这小猪活多长，
我们可以肯定地讲：
他不会给世界上哪一个，
带来一丁点儿快乐。
碰到这种事情我们怎么办才是？
我们将采取温和的措施，
小心地把这小东西，
变成会令我们高兴的玩意儿——
比方变个小玩偶，
或者变个大皮球，
变成木马，变成弹子……
但这讨厌的孩子实在太可耻，
那么贪婪、可恶、幼稚，
他在我们的嘴里头，
留下的味道叫人作呕，
因此我们要赶紧选择一样东西，
能把这种该死的味道除去。
“来吧！”我们叫道，“时机已经成熟，
把他弄到玻璃管里头！
他必须去！不管怎么说也好！”
很快他就要看到，
在他所去的车间里面，
有趣的事情将会连续不断。
不过亲爱的小朋友们不必担心，
奥古斯塔斯•格卢普不会出事情。
当然，我们必须承认一点：
他将有很大改变。
他将变得完全不像从前，
只要进到制糖机器里面，
轮子慢慢地转了一下又一下，
齿轮开始又磨又压，
成百把刀削了又削，
我们加糖，加奶，加香料，
我们把他再煮一分钟，
直到我们完全确定：
他的全部贪心和毛病，
全都煮得一点儿也不剩。
于是他才离开机器！
天哪！这时出现了奇迹！
这个孩子不久以前，
还是到处叫人讨厌，
但这贪吃的小坏蛋，
如今变得到处受人喜欢！
因为谁会讨厌牛奶巧克力软糖，
它又是甜又是香？
“我告诉过你们他们爱唱歌！”旺卡先生叫道，“他们是不是很讨人喜欢？他们是不是十分
可爱？可是他们的话你们一个字也不要相信。全是胡说八道，没有半句是真的！”
“那些奥帕—伦帕人真的在开玩笑吗，爷爷？”查理问道。
“当然是在开玩笑，”约瑟夫爷爷回答说，“他们一定是在开玩笑，至少我希望他们是在开
玩笑。你不这样想吗？”
18 Down the Chocolate River
18 Down the Chocolate River
‘Off we go!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Hurry up, everybody! Follow me to the next room! And
please don’t worry about Augustus Gloop. He’s bound to come out in the wash. They
always do. We shall have to make the next part of the journey by boat! Here she comes!
Look!’
A steamy mist was rising up now from the great warm chocolate river, and out of the
mist there appeared suddenly a most fantastic pink boat. It was a large open row boat
with a tall front and a tall back (like a Viking boat of old), and it was of such a shining
sparkling glistening pink colour that the whole thing looked as though it were made of
bright, pink glass. There were many oars on either side of it, and as the boat came
closer, the watchers on the riverbank could see that the oars were being pulled by
masses of Oompa-Loompas - at least ten of them to each oar.
‘This is my private yacht!’ cried Mr Wonka, beaming with pleasure. ‘I made her by
hollowing out an enormous boiled sweet! Isn’t she beautiful! See how she comes cutting
through the river!’
The gleaming pink boiled-sweet boat glided up to the riverbank. One hundred Oompa-
Loompas rested on their oars and stared up at the visitors. Then suddenly, for some
reason best known to themselves, they all burst into shrieks of laughter.
‘What’s so funny?’ asked Violet Beauregarde.
‘Oh, don’t worry about them!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘They’re always laughing! They think
everything’s a colossal joke! Jump into the boat, all of you! Come on! Hurry up!’
As soon as everyone was safely in, the Oompa-Loompas pushed the boat away from
the bank and began to row swiftly downriver.
‘Hey, there! Mike Teavee!’ shouted Mr Wonka. ‘Please do not lick the boat with your
tongue! It’ll only make it sticky!’
‘Daddy,’ said Veruca Salt, ‘I want a boat like this! I want you to buy me a big pink
boiled-sweet boat exactly like Mr Wonka’s! And I want lots of Oompa-Loompas to row
me about, and I want a chocolate river and I want… I want…‘
‘She wants a good kick in the pants,’ whispered Grandpa Joe to Charlie. The old man
was sitting in the back of the boat and little Charlie Bucket was right beside him. Charlie
was holding tightly on to his grandfather’s bony old hand. He was in a whirl of
excitement. Everything that he had seen so far - the great chocolate river, the waterfall,
the huge sucking pipes, the minty sugar meadows, the Oompa-Loompas, the beautiful
pink boat, and most of all, Mr Willy Wonka himself - had been so astonishing that he
began to wonder
whether there could possibly be any more astonishments left. Where were they going
now? What were they going to see? And what in the world was going to happen in the
next room?
‘Isn’t it marvellous?’ said Grandpa Joe, grinning at Charlie.
Charlie nodded and smiled up at the old man.
Suddenly, Mr Wonka, who was sitting on Charlie’s other side, reached down into the
bottom of the boat, picked up a large mug, dipped it into the river, filled it with
chocolate, and handed it to Charlie. ‘Drink this,’ he said. ‘It’ll do you good! You look
starved to death!’
Then Mr Wonka filled a second mug and gave it to Grandpa Joe. ‘You, too,’ he said.
‘You look like a skeleton! What’s the matter? Hasn’t there been anything to eat in your
house lately?’
‘Not much,’ said Grandpa Joe.
Charlie put the mug to his lips, and as the rich warm creamy chocolate ran down his
throat into his empty tummy, his whole body from head to toe began to tingle with
pleasure, and a feeling of intense happiness spread over him.
‘You like it?’ asked Mr Wonka.
‘Oh, it’s wonderful!’ Charlie said.
‘The creamiest loveliest chocolate I’ve ever tasted!’ said Grandpa Joe, smacking his
lips.
‘That’s because it’s been mixed by waterfall,’ Mr Wonka told him.
The boat sped on down the river. The river was getting narrower. There was some
kind of a dark tunnel ahead - a great round tunnel that looked like an enormous pipe -
and the river was running right into the tunnel. And so was the boat! ‘Row on!’ shouted
Mr Wonka, jumping up and waving his stick in the air. ‘Full speed ahead!’ And with the
Oompa-Loompas rowing faster than ever, the boat shot into the pitch-dark tunnel, and
all the passengers screamed with excitement.
‘How can they see where they’re going?’ shrieked Violet Beauregarde in the darkness.
‘There’s no knowing where they’re going!’ cried Mr Wonka, hooting with laughter.
‘ There’s no earthly way of knowing
Which direction they are going!
There’s no knowing where they’re rowing,
Or which way the river’s flowing!
Mot a speck of light is showing,
So the danger must be growing,
For the rowers keep on rowing,
And they’re certainly not showing
Any signs that they are slowing…’
‘He’s gone off his rocker!’ shouted one of the fathers, aghast, and the other parents
joined in the chorus of frightened shouting. ‘He’s crazy!’ they shouted.
‘He’s balmy!’
‘He’s nutty!’
‘He’s screwy!’
‘He’s batty!’
‘He’s dippy!’
‘He’s dotty!’
‘He’s daffy!’
‘He’s goofy!’
‘He’s beany!’
‘He’s buggy!’
‘He’s wacky!’
‘He’s loony!’
‘No, he is not!’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘Switch on the lights!’ shouted Mr Wonka. And suddenly, on came the lights and the
whole tunnel was brilliantly lit up, and Charlie could see that they were indeed inside a
gigantic pipe, and the great upward- curving walls of the pipe were pure white and
spotlessly clean. The river of chocolate was flowing very fast inside the pipe, and the
Oompa-Loompas were all rowing like mad, and the boat was rocketing along at a furious
pace. Mr Wonka was jumping up and down in the back of the boat and calling to the
rowers to row faster and faster still. He seemed to love the sensation of whizzing
through a white tunnel in a pink boat on a chocolate river, and he clapped his hands and
laughed and kept glancing at his passengers to see if they were enjoying it as much as
he.
‘Look, Grandpa!’ cried Charlie. ‘There’s a door in the wall!’ It was a green door and it
was set into the wall of the tunnel just above the level of the river. As they flashed past
it there was just enough time to read the writing on the door: STOREROOM NUMBER
54, it said. ALL THE CREAMS - DAIRY CREAM, WHIPPED CREAM, VIOLET CREAM,
COFFEE CREAM, PINEAPPLE CREAM, VANILLA CREAM, AND HAIR CREAM.
‘Hair cream?’ cried Mike Teavee. ‘You don’t use hair cream?’
‘Row on!’ shouted Mr Wonka. ‘There’s no time to answer silly questions!’
They streaked past a black door. STOREROOM NUMBER 71, it said on it. WHIPS -
ALL SHAPES AND SIZES.
‘Whips!’ cried Veruca Salt. ‘What on earth do you use whips for?’
‘For whipping cream, of course,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘How can you whip cream without
whips? Whipped cream isn’t whipped cream at all unless it’s been whipped with whips.
Just as a poached egg isn’t a poached egg unless it’s been stolen from the woods in the
dead of night! Row on, please!’
They passed a yellow door on which it said: STOREROOM NUMBER 77 - ALL THE
BEANS, CACAO BEANS, COFFEE BEANS, JELLY BEANS, AND HAS BEANS.
‘Has beans?’ cried Violet Beauregarde.
‘You’re one yourself!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘There’s no time for arguing! Press on, press on!’
But five seconds later, when a bright red door came into sight ahead, he suddenly waved
his gold-topped cane in the air and shouted, ‘Stop the boat!’
18　顺巧克力河而下
　　18　顺巧克力河而下
　　“我们走吧！”旺卡先生叫道，“各位，快点走！跟着我到下一个车间去！请不必为奥古斯塔斯•格卢普担心，他一定会平安无事的。进入玻璃管的人都平安无事。下一部分参观我们必须乘船！船来了，瞧！”
　　这时候，滚热的巧克力大河上升起了蒸汽似的迷雾，从迷雾中忽然出现了一艘最奇妙的粉红色的船。这是一艘很大的划桨船，船头船尾都高高地翘起（像古时候的海盗船一样）。
　　由于船身的粉红色闪闪发光，整条船好像是用明亮的粉红色玻璃做成的。船两边各有许多桨，当船划近一点儿时，岸上的人可以看到，这些桨是由一大群奥帕—伦帕人划着的——每只桨至少有十个奥帕—伦帕人在划。
　　“这是我的私人游艇，”旺卡先生叫道，高兴得满面红光，“是我挖空了一块巨大的硬糖造成的。它是不是漂亮极了？瞧它怎样破浪而来！”
　　亮光闪闪的粉红色硬糖船漂到河边。一百名奥帕—伦帕人靠在他们的桨旁，抬头看着这十几位参观者。忽然，他们全都爆发出尖声的大笑，原因只有他们自己最清楚。
　　“有什么好笑的？”维奥莉特•博雷加德问道。
　　“噢，不要管他们！”旺卡先生叫道，“他们老爱笑！他们以为什么事情都是非常好笑的！
　　大家跳上船吧！来，快一点儿！”
　　当每一个人在船上坐稳后，那些奥帕—伦帕人把船撑离河岸，快速地划着它顺河而下。
　　“喂，你，迈克•蒂维，”旺卡先生叫道，“请你不要用舌头去舔船！这样会使它黏糊糊的！”
　　“爸爸，”维鲁卡•索尔特说，“我要一艘这样的船！我要你给我买一艘粉红色的大硬糖船，跟旺卡先生这艘一模一样的！我还要许多奥帕—伦帕人给我划船。我要一条巧克力河，我要……我要……”
　　“她要好好给骂一顿。”约瑟夫爷爷悄悄地对查理说。这位老人家坐在船尾，小查理•巴克特就坐在他的身边。查理紧紧握住爷爷瘦骨嶙峋的手。他兴奋得头昏目眩。直到现在他所看见的一切——巨大的巧克力河、瀑布、大吸管、薄荷糖草地、奥帕—伦帕人、美丽的粉红色船，特别是旺卡先生本人——全都那么使他惊奇，因此他开始怀疑是否还可能有更使他惊奇的东西。他们还要去哪里？他们还要看到什么？在下一个车间将会发生什么事情呢？
　　“真是棒极了，是不是呀？”约瑟夫爷爷对查理笑着说。
　　查理点点头，抬起眼睛向爷爷微笑。
　　忽然，坐在查理另一边的旺卡先生伸手到船底下拿出一个大杯子，从河里舀起满满一杯巧克力递给查理。“把这个喝下去！”他说，“对你有好处的！看你那副样子，好像快要饿死了！”
　　接着旺卡先生又拿出一个杯子，舀了满满一杯巧克力递给约瑟夫爷爷。“你也来一杯，”他说，“你看上去像一具骷髅！这是怎么回事？近来你们家没有东西吃吗？”
　　“不多。”约瑟夫爷爷说。
　　查理把杯子放到嘴边，当香浓的热奶油巧克力从他的喉咙流进他的空肚子时，他整个身体从头到脚趾快活得震动起来，有一种无限快活的感觉遍布全身。
　　“你喜欢吗？”旺卡先生问。
　　“噢，太好了！”查理说。
　　“是我尝过的巧克力当中奶油味最足、味道最好的！”约瑟夫爷爷咂着嘴说。
　　“那是因为它由瀑布调匀。”旺卡先生告诉他。
　　船飞快地顺流而下。河道愈来愈窄。前面有条黑暗的隧道——一条巨大的圆隧道，看上去像一根大管子。河一直通到隧道里去。船也跟着进去了！“使劲划！”旺卡先生大叫，跳起来举起手杖在空中挥舞，“全速前进！”那些奥帕—伦帕人划得比先前更快了。船冲进漆黑的隧道，所有乘船的人紧张得尖叫起来。
　　“他们怎么能看到路呢？”维奥莉特•博雷加德在黑暗中尖声问道。
　　“根本不知道他们要往哪里去！”旺卡先生大笑着叫道。
　　根本没有办法知道，
　　他们正向哪个方向跑！
　　根本不知道他们划向什么地方，
　　也不知道河向哪儿流！
　　一点儿亮光也看不见，
　　前路一定愈来愈危险，
　　因为划船的人只管划向前，
　　可以肯定一点，
　　他们没有任何慢下来的打算……
　　“他发狂了！”其中一个爸爸叫起来。他吓呆了，其他的爸爸妈妈也加入了这场害怕的大叫之中。“他疯了！”他们叫道。
　　“他傻头傻脑！”
　　“他疯头疯脑！”
　　“他愣头愣脑！”
　　“他犟头犟脑！”
　　“他戆头戆脑！”
　　“他呆头呆脑！”
　　“他颠头颠脑！”
　　“他昏头昏脑！”
　　“他笨头笨脑！”
　　“他晕头晕脑！”
　　“他蠢头蠢脑！”
　　“不，他没有！”约瑟夫爷爷说。
　　“把灯打开！”旺卡先生叫道。忽然之间，所有的灯都亮了，整条隧道被照得通明。查理看到他们的确在一根巨型管子里，管子巨大的拱壁是纯白的，一尘不染。巧克力河在管子里流得很快，那些奥帕—伦帕人疯狂地划着，船飞也似的向前直冲。旺卡先生在船尾跳上跳下，催促划船的人划得快了再快。他好像很喜欢这样乘着粉红色的船，顺着巧克力河嗖嗖地通过隧道。他拍手大笑，一直凝视着他的乘客，看他们是不是也和他一样欣赏这样的航行。
　　“瞧，爷爷！”查理叫道，“墙上有道门！”这是一道绿色的门，开在隧道的拱壁上，只高出河面一点儿。他们掠过门前时，仅仅来得及读出门上的字：第五十四号贮藏室。所有的奶油——乳制奶油、掼奶油、紫罗兰奶油、咖啡奶油、菠萝奶油、香草奶油、头发奶油。
　　“头发奶油？”迈克•蒂维叫道，“你总不会用头发奶油吧？”
　　“向前划！”旺卡先生大声说，“没有时间回答这种无聊的问题！”
　　他们又掠过一道黑色的门。门上写着：第七十一号贮藏室。搅打器——各种形状和大小。
　　“搅打器？”维鲁卡•索尔特叫道，“你用搅打器来干什么？”
　　“当然是用来搅打奶油喽，”旺卡先生说，“没有搅打器怎么能搅打奶油呢？除非用搅打器搅打过，否则掼奶油便不称其为掼奶油。就像钱包，除非里面装钱，否则就不是钱包！请继续划！”
　　他们经过一道黄色的门，门上写着：第七十七号贮藏室。所有的豆——可可豆、咖啡豆、果冻豆、狗豆子 [1] 。
　　“狗豆子？”维奥莉特•博雷加德叫道。
　　“你自己就是一粒狗豆子！”旺卡先生说，“没有时间争论了！向前划，向前划！”但五秒钟后，当前面出现一道鲜红的门时，他忽然在空中挥动他的金头手杖叫道：“停船！”
　　[1]寄生在狗身上的一种小昆虫，灰褐色，略作椭圆形，吸狗的血液。
19 The Inventing Room – Everlasting Gobstoppers and Hair Toffee
19 The Inventing Room - Everlasting Gobstoppers and Hair Toffee
When Mr Wonka shouted ‘Stop the boat!’ the Oompa-Loompas jammed their oars into
the river and backed water furiously. The boat stopped.
The Oompa-Loompas guided the boat alongside the red door. On the door it said,
INVENTING ROOM - PRIVATE - KEEP OUT. Mr Wonka took a key from his pocket,
leaned over the side of the boat, and put the key in the keyhole.
‘This is the most important room in the entire factory!’ he said. ‘All my most secret
new inventions are cooking and simmering in here! Old Fickel-gruber would give his
front teeth to be allowed inside just for three minutes! So would Prodnose and
Slugworth and all the other rotten chocolate makers! But now, listen to me! I want no
messing about when you go in! No touching, no meddling, and no tasting! Is that
agreed?’
‘Yes, yes!’ the children cried. ‘We won’t touch a thing!’
‘Up to now,’ Mr Wonka said, ‘nobody else, not even an Oompa-Loompa, has ever been
allowed in here!’ He opened the door and stepped out of the boat into the room. The
four children and their parents all scrambled after him.
‘Don’t touch!’ shouted Mr Wonka. ‘And don’t knock anything over!’
Charlie Bucket stared around the gigantic room in which he now found himself. The
place was like a witch’s kitchen! All about him black metal pots were boiling and
bubbling on huge stoves, and kettles were hissing and pans were sizzling, and strange
iron machines were clanking and spluttering, and there were pipes running all over the
ceiling and walls, and the whole place was filled with smoke and steam and delicious
rich smells.
Mr Wonka himself had suddenly become even more excited than usual, and anyone
could see that this was the room he loved best of all. He was hopping about among the
saucepans and the machines like a child among his Christmas presents, not knowing
which thing to look at first. He lifted the lid from a huge pot and took a sniff; then he
rushed over and dipped a finger into a barrel of sticky yellow stuff and had a taste; then
he skipped across to one of the machines and turned half a dozen knobs this way and
that; then he peered anxiously through the glass door of a gigantic oven, rubbing his
hands and cackling with delight at what he saw inside. Then he ran over to another
machine, a small shiny affair that kept going phut-phut-phut-phut-phut, and every time it
went phut, a large green marble dropped out of it into a basket on the floor. At least it
looked like a marble.
‘Everlasting Gobstoppers!’ cried Mr Wonka proudly. ‘They’re completely new! I am
inventing them for children who are given very little pocket money. You can put an
Everlasting Gobstopper in your mouth and you can suck it and suck it and suck it and
suck it and it will never get any smaller!’
‘It’s like gum!’ cried Violet Beauregarde.
‘It is not like gum,’ Mr Wonka said. ‘Gum is for chewing, and if you tried chewing one
of these Gobstoppers here you’d break your teeth off! And they never get any smaller!
They never disappear! NEVER! At least I don’t think they do. There’s one of them being
tested this very moment in the Testing Room next door. An Oompa-Loompa is sucking it.
He’s been sucking it for very nearly a year now without stopping, and it’s still just as
good as ever!
‘Now, over here,’ Mr Wonka went on, skipping excitedly across the room to the
opposite wall, ‘over here I am inventing a completely new line in toffees!’ He stopped
beside a large saucepan. The saucepan was full of a thick gooey purplish treacle, boiling
and bubbling. By standing on his toes, little Charlie could just see inside it.
‘That’s Hair Toffee!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘You eat just one tiny bit of that, and in exactly
half an hour a brand-new luscious thick silky beautiful crop of hair will start growing
out all over the top of your head! And a moustache! And a beard!’
‘A beard!’ cried Veruca Salt. ‘Who wants a beard, for heaven’s sake?’
‘It would suit you very well,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘but unfortunately the mixture is not
quite right yet. I’ve got it too strong. It works too well. I tried it on an Oompa-Loompa
yesterday in the Testing Room and immediately a huge black beard started shooting out
of his chin, and the beard grew so fast that soon it was trailing all over the floor in a
thick hairy carpet. It was growing faster than we could cut it! In the end we had to use a
lawn mower to keep it in check! But I’ll get the mixture right soon! And when I do, then
there’ll be no excuse any more for little boys and girls going about with bald heads!’
‘But Mr Wonka,’ said Mike Teavee, ‘little boys and girls never do go about with…‘
‘Don’t argue, my dear child, please don’t argue!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘It’s such a waste of
precious time! Now, over here, if you will all step this way, I will show you something
that I am terrifically proud of. Oh, do be careful! Don’t knock anything over! Stand
back!’
19　发明室——永远吃不掉的石头弹子糖和头发太妃糖
19　发明室——永远吃不掉的石头弹子糖和头发太妃糖
当旺卡先生大叫一声“停船”时，所有的奥帕—伦帕人把他们的船桨插进河里，使劲地倒
划。船停下来了。
奥帕—伦帕人把船靠到那道红色的门旁。门上写着：发明室——私人重地——闲人免
进。旺卡先生从衣袋里掏出一把钥匙，从船边靠过去，把钥匙插进钥匙孔。
“这是全厂最重要的房间！”他说，“我所有最秘密的新发明都是在这里炮制的！要让老菲
克尔格鲁伯进去三分钟，他宁肯用他的门牙来作交换！普罗德诺斯、斯拉格沃思和其他下流
的巧克力制造商也会这样做！不过现在听我说，你们进去，我不希望有任何捣乱行为！不要
摸，不要多事，不要乱吃！答应吗？”
“答应，答应！”孩子们叫道，“我们什么也不摸！”
“直到现在，”旺卡先生说，“从来没有人，甚至没有一个奥帕—伦帕人，曾被允许走进这
房间！”他打开门，从船上跨进房间。四个孩子和他们的家人都跟在他后面爬上去。
“不要摸！”旺卡先生叫道，“不要弄翻任何东西！”
查理•巴克特环顾他现在进来的巨大房间。这地方像一个女巫的厨房！在他的四周，许多
黑色金属锅正在大灶上沸腾得扑扑响，水壶在咝咝响，平底锅在吱吱响，奇怪的铁机器在当
啷当啷、噼里啪啦响。天花板和四面墙上布满管子，整个房间弥漫着烟雾和蒸气以及浓郁的
香气。
旺卡先生似乎变得比先前更兴奋。大家一看便知道，这是他最喜欢的房间。他在深底锅
和机器之间跳来跳去，像个小孩子在他的圣诞礼物之间跳来跳去一样，不知道先看哪一样
好。他掀开一个大锅的盖子闻闻；接着他冲过去把一根手指伸进一大桶黄色黏液，再把手指
拿出来尝尝味道；接着他跑到一个机器那里，把机器的半打旋钮转来转去；接着他焦急地望
着一个巨炉的玻璃门，对看到的炉里的情况高兴得搓着手咯咯笑；接着他跑到另一部机器那
边，这是一个发亮的小玩意儿，不断发出啪啪啪啪的声音，每发出啪的一声，一粒绿色的大
石头弹子就落到地上的一个篮子里。至少它看起来像是一粒石头弹子。
“永远吃不掉的石头弹子糖！”旺卡先生自豪地说，“这是崭新的产品！我是为零用钱不多
的小朋友发明的。把一粒永远吃不掉的石头弹子糖放进嘴里，吮了又吮，吮了又吮，它永远
不会变小！”
“就像口香糖！”维奥莉特•博雷加德叫道。
“它不像口香糖，口香糖是嚼的。如果你嚼石头弹子糖，就要嚼崩你的牙！它们永远不会
变小！它们永远不会消失！永远不会！至少我想它们不会。现在有一粒正在隔壁实验室进行
实验。一个奥帕—伦帕人正在吮着它。他已经不断地吮了快一年了，糖依然是老样子。”旺卡
先生说。
“现在看看这里，”旺卡先生兴奋地奔到对面的墙边，接着说，“我正在这里发明一系列全
新的太妃糖！”他在一个大深底锅旁边停下。锅里盛满了很稠的紫色糖浆，正在沸腾冒泡。小
查理踮起脚，正好看到锅的里面。
“那是头发太妃糖！”旺卡先生叫道，“你只要吃一丁点儿，正好过半小时，你的整个头顶
就会长满厚厚一层新的柔软秀发！还长出唇髭！还长出长胡子！”
“胡子，”维鲁卡•索尔特叫道，“天哪，谁要胡子呢？”
“你长胡子正合适，”旺卡先生说，“只可惜这种混合物还没有完全调好。我的配方开得太
重了，它的效果过于厉害。昨天在实验室里，我让一个奥帕—伦帕人试了试，一把黑色大胡
子马上从他的下巴迸出来，长得飞快，一下子就铺满整个地板，像是一张胡子厚地毡。它长
起来快得连剃也来不及！最后我们只好用一台割草机在他的脸颊上割个不停！不过我很快就
能把混合物配好！一旦成功，小男孩和小女孩就再也没有理由秃着头走来走去了！”
“不过旺卡先生，”迈克•蒂维说，“事实上从没有小男孩和小女孩走来走去是……”
“不要跟我争论，我亲爱的小朋友，请不要跟我争论！”旺卡先生叫道，“这太浪费宝贵时
间了！到这边来，如果你们全都过来，我要让你们看一样我无比自豪的东西。噢，请小心，
不要打翻任何东西！退后一点儿！”
20 The Great Gum Machine
20 The Great Gum Machine
Mr Wonka led the party over to a gigantic machine that stood in the very centre of the
Inventing Room. It was a mountain of gleaming metal that towered high above the
children and their parents. Out of the very top of it there sprouted hundreds and
hundreds of thin glass tubes, and the glass tubes all curled downwards and came
together in a bunch and hung suspended over an enormous round tub as big as a bath.
‘Here we go!’ cried Mr Wonka, and he pressed three different buttons on the side of
the machine. A second later, a mighty rumbling sound came from inside it, and the
whole machine began to shake most frighteningly, and steam began hissing out of it all
over, and then suddenly the watchers noticed that runny stuff was pouring down the
insides of all the hundreds of little glass tubes and squirting out into the great tub below.
And in every single tube the runny stuff was of a different colour, so that all the colours
of the rainbow (and many others as well) came sloshing and splashing into the tub. It
was a lovely sight. And when the tub was nearly full, Mr Wonka pressed another button,
and immediately the runny stuff disappeared, and a whizzing whirring noise took its
place; and then a giant whizzer started whizzing round inside the enormous tub, mixing
up all the different coloured liquids like an ice-cream soda. Gradually, the mixture began
to froth. It became frothier and frothier, and it turned from blue to white to green to
brown to yellow, then back to blue again.
‘Watch!’ said Mr Wonka.
Click went the machine, and the whizzer stopped whizzing. And now there came a
sort of sucking noise, and very quickly all the blue frothy mixture in the huge basin was
sucked back into the stomach of the machine. There was a moment of silence. Then a
few queer rumblings were heard. Then silence again. Then suddenly, the machine let out
a monstrous mighty groan, and at the same moment a tiny drawer (no bigger than the
drawer in a slot machine) popped out of the side of the machine, and in the drawer
there lay something so small and thin and grey that everyone thought it must be a
mistake. The thing looked like a little strip of grey cardboard.
The children and their parents stared at the little grey strip lying in the drawer.
‘You mean that’s all?’ said Mike Teavee, disgusted.
‘That’s all,’ answered Mr Wonka, gazing proudly at the result. ‘Don’t you know what it
is?’
There was a pause. Then suddenly, Violet Beau-regarde, the silly gum-chewing girl, let
out a yell of excitement. ‘By gum, it’s gum!’ she shrieked. ‘It’s a stick of chewing-gum!’
‘Right you are!’ cried Mr Wonka, slapping Violet hard on the back. ‘It’s a stick of gum!
It’s a stick of the most amazing and fabulous and sensational gum in the world!’
20　口香糖大机器
　　20　口香糖大机器
　　旺卡先生带领大家到发明室中央的一部巨型机器那里。这是一部像座山一样的金属机器，它亮光闪闪，高耸在孩子们和家长们的头顶上。从它的顶端伸出成百上千根细玻璃管，玻璃管全都弯向下面，合成一束，悬挂在一个像浴缸一样大的水槽上。
　　“让我们来开动机器吧！”旺卡先生叫着，按了按机器旁边的三个按钮。一秒钟后，机器里面发出巨大的隆隆声，整部机器开始极其可怕地震动，蒸气也开始从整部机器里嘶嘶地喷出来。忽然，参观者看到成百上千根细玻璃管里都有流动的液体急速地流下来，喷射到下面那个大槽里。每根玻璃管里的流动液体颜色不同，因此彩虹般的色彩（还有别的很多色彩）同时落到大槽里，真是美丽的奇观。当大槽快满时，旺卡先生按了另一个按钮，流动液体马上停止喷射，代以一阵呜呜旋转的声音。这时候大槽里一部巨大的离心干燥机开始呜呜地旋转，把各种颜色的液体搅拌得像冰淇淋苏打那样。混合物开始逐渐起泡。泡沫愈来愈多，愈来愈多，从蓝色变成白色、绿色、棕色、黄色，然后又变回蓝色。
　　“看着！”旺卡先生说。
　　机器咔哒一声，离心干燥机停止了呜呜旋转。这时传来一种吮吸声，大槽里所有蓝色起泡沫的混合物很快地重新被吸到机器的内部。静寂了一阵。接着听到几下奇怪的隆隆声。接着又静下来。接着忽然一下子，机器发出巨大有力的呻吟声，与此同时，一个小抽屉（不比自动售货机的小抽屉大）从机器旁边弹出来。抽屉里有一样东西，又小又细，灰色的，因此大家以为一定是出错了。这东西看上去像一张灰色的小厚纸条。
　　孩子们和他们的家长看着抽屉里那张灰色小纸条。
　　“你是说这就完了吗？”迈克•蒂维感到扫兴地问道。
　　“这就完了。”旺卡先生回答说，看着这成果觉得很自豪，“你不知道这是什么吗？”
　　大家沉默了一阵。接着嚼口香糖的傻姑娘维奥莉特•博雷加德忽然发出一声兴奋的大叫。“以口香糖的名义说，这是口香糖！”她尖叫道，“这是一片口香糖！”
　　“你说得对！”旺卡先生用力拍拍维奥莉特的背叫道，“这是一片口香糖！这是一片世界上最惊人、最难以置信、最令人兴奋的口香糖！”
21 Good-bye Violet
21 Good-bye Violet
‘This gum,’ Mr Wonka went on, ‘is my latest, my greatest, my most fascinating
invention! It’s a chewing-gum meal! It’s… it’s… it’s… That tiny little strip of gum lying
there is a whole three-course dinner all by itself!’
‘What sort of nonsense is this?’ said one of the fathers.
‘My dear sir!’ cried Mr Wonka, ‘when I start selling this gum in the shops it will
change everything! It will be the end of all kitchens and all cooking! There will be no
more shopping to do! No more buying of meat and groceries! There’ll be no knives and
forks at mealtimes! No plates! No washing up! No rubbish! No mess! Just a little strip of
Wonka’s magic chewing-gum - and that’s all you’ll ever need at breakfast, lunch, and
supper! This piece of gum I’ve just made happens to be tomato soup, roast beef, and
blueberry pie, but you can have almost anything you want!’
‘What do you mean, it’s tomato soup, roast beef, and blueberry pie?’ said Violet
Beauregarde.
‘If you were to start chewing it,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘then that is exactly what you would
get on the menu. It’s absolutely amazing! You can actually feel the food going down your
throat and into your tummy! And you can taste it perfectly! And it fills you up! It
satisfies you! It’s terrific!’
‘It’s utterly impossible,’ said Veruca Salt.
‘Just so long as it’s gum,’ shouted Violet Beauregarde, ‘just so long as it’s a piece of
gum and I can chew it, then that’s for me!’ And quickly she took her own world-record
piece of chewing-gum out of her mouth and stuck it behind her left ear. ‘Come on, Mr
Wonka,’ she said, ‘hand over this magic gum of yours and we’ll see if the thing works.’
‘Now, Violet,’ said Mrs Beauregarde, her mother; ‘don’t let’s do anything silly, Violet.’
‘I want the gum!’ Violet said obstinately. ‘What’s so silly?’
‘I would rather you didn’t take it,’ Mr Wonka told her gently. ‘You see, I haven’t got it
quite right yet. There are still one or two things…’
‘Oh, to blazes with that!’ said Violet, and suddenly, before Mr Wonka could stop her,
she shot out a fat hand and grabbed the stick of gum out of the little drawer and popped
it into her mouth. At once, her huge, well-trained jaws started chewing away on it like a
pair of tongs.
‘Don’t!’ said Mr Wonka.
‘Fabulous!’ shouted Violet. ‘It’s tomato soup! It’s hot and creamy and delicious! I can
feel it running down my throat!’
‘Stop!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘The gum isn’t ready yet! It’s not right!’
‘Of course it’s right!’ said Violet. ‘It’s working beautifully! Oh my, what lovely soup
this is!’
‘Spit it out!’ said Mr Wonka.
‘It’s changing!’ shouted Violet, chewing and grinning both at the same time. ‘The
second course is coming up! It’s roast beef! It’s tender and juicy! Oh boy, what a flavour!
The baked potato is marvellous, too! It’s got a crispy skin and it’s all filled with butter
inside!’
‘But how in-teresting, Violet,’ said Mrs Beauregarde. ‘You are a clever girl.’
‘Keep chewing, baby!’ said Mr Beauregarde. ‘Keep right on chewing! This is a great
day for the Beauregardes! Our little girl is the first person in the world to have a
chewing-gum meal!’
Everybody was watching Violet Beauregarde as she stood there chewing this
extraordinary gum. Little Charlie Bucket was staring at her absolutely spellbound,
watching her huge rubbery lips as they pressed and unpressed with the chewing, and
Grandpa Joe stood beside him, gaping at the girl. Mr Wonka was wringing his hands and
saying, ‘No, no, no, no, no! It isn’t ready for eating! It isn’t right! You mustn’t do it!’
‘Blueberry pie and cream!’ shouted Violet. ‘Here it comes! Oh my, it’s perfect! It’s
beautiful! It’s… it’s exactly as though I’m swallowing it! It’s as though I’m chewing and
swallowing great big spoonfuls of the most marvellous blueberry pie in the world!’
‘Good heavens, girl!’ shrieked Mrs Beauregarde suddenly, staring at Violet, ‘what’s
happening to your nose!’
‘Oh, be quiet, mother, and let me finish!’ said Violet.
‘It’s turning blue!’ screamed Mrs Beauregarde. ‘Your nose is turning blue as a
blueberry!’
‘Your mother is right!’ shouted Mr Beauregarde. ‘Your whole nose has gone purple!’
‘What do you mean?’ said Violet, still chewing away.
‘Your cheeks!’ screamed Mrs Beauregarde. ‘They’re turning blue as well! So is your
chin! Your whole face is turning blue!’
‘Spit that gum out at once!’ ordered Mr Beauregarde.
‘Mercy! Save us!’ yelled Mrs Beauregarde. ‘The girl’s going blue and purple all over!
Even her hair is changing colour! Violet, you’re turning violet, Violet! What is happening
to you?’
T told you I hadn’t got it quite right,’ sighed Mr Wonka, shaking his head sadly.
‘I’ll say you haven’t!’ cried Mrs Beauregarde. ‘Just look at the girl now!’
Everybody was staring at Violet. And what a terrible, peculiar sight she was! Her face
and hands and legs and neck, in fact the skin all over her body, as well as her great big
mop of curly hair, had turned a brilliant, purplish-blue, the colour of blueberry juice!
‘It always goes wrong when we come to the dessert,’ sighed Mr Wonka. ‘It’s the
blueberry pie that does it. But I’ll get it right one day, you wait and see.’
‘Violet,’ screamed Mrs Beauregarde, ‘you’re swelling up!’
‘I feel sick,’ Violet said.
‘You’re swelling up!’ screamed Mrs Beauregarde again.
‘I feel most peculiar!’ gasped Violet.
‘I’m not surprised!’ said Mr Beauregarde.
‘Great heavens, girl!’ screeched Mrs Beauregarde. ‘You’re blowing up like a balloon!’
‘Like a blueberry,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘Call a doctor!’ shouted Mr Beauregarde.
‘Prick her with a pin!’ said one of the other fathers.
‘Save her!’ cried Mrs Beauregarde, wringing her hands.
But there was no saving her now. Her body was swelling up and changing shape at
such a rate that within a minute it had turned into nothing less than an enormous round
blue ball - a gigantic blueberry, in fact - and all that remained of Violet Beauregarde
herself was a tiny pair of legs and a tiny pair of arms sticking out of the great round fruit
and little head on top.
‘It always happens like that,’ sighed Mr Wonka. ‘I’ve tried it twenty times in the
Testing Room on twenty Oompa- Loompas, and every one of them finished up as a
blueberry. It’s most annoying. I just can’t understand it.’
‘But I don’t want a blueberry for a daughter!’ yelled Mrs Beauregarde. ‘Put her back to
what she was this instant!’
Mr Wonka clicked his fingers, and ten Oompa-Loompas appeared immediately at his
side.
‘Roll Miss Beauregarde into the boat,’ he said to them, ‘and take her along to the
Juicing Room at once.’
‘The Juicing Room?’ cried Mrs Beauregarde. ‘What are they going to do to her there?’
‘Squeeze her,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘We’ve got to squeeze the juice out of her immediately.
After that, we’ll just have to see how she comes out. But don’t worry, my dear Mrs
Beauregarde. We’ll get her repaired if it’s the last thing we do. I am sorry about it all, I
really am…’
Already the ten Oompa-Loompas were rolling the enormous blueberry across the floor
of the Inventing Room towards the door that led to the chocolate river where the boat
was waiting. Mr and Mrs Beauregarde hurried after them. The rest of the party,
including little Charlie Bucket and Grandpa Joe, stood absolutely still and watched them
go.
‘Listen!’ whispered Charlie. ‘Listen, Grandpa! The Oompa-Loompas in the boat outside
are starting to sing!’
The voices, one hundred of them singing together, came loud and clear into the room:
‘Dear friends, we surely all agree
There’s almost nothing worse to see
Than some repulsive little bum
Who’s always chewing chewing-gum.
(It’s very near as bad as those
Who sit around and pick the nose.)
So please believe us when we say
That chewing gum will never pay;
This sticky habits bound to send
The chewer to a sticky end.
Did any of you ever know
A person called Miss Bigelow?
This dreadful woman saw no wrong
In chewing, chewing all day long.
She chewed while bathing in the tub,
She chewed while dancing at her club,
She chewed in church and on the bus;
It really was quite ludicrous!
And when she couldn’t find her gum,
She’d chew up the linoleum,
Or anything that happened near -
A pair of boots, the postman’s ear,
Or other people’s underclothes,
And once she chewed her boy-friend’s nose.
She went on chewing till, at last,
Her chewing muscles grew so vast
That from her face her giant chin
Stuck out just like a violin.
For years and years she chewed away,
Consuming fifty bits a day,
Until one summer’s eve, alas,
A horrid business came to pass.
Miss Bigelow went late to bed,
For half an hour she lay and read,
Chewing and chewing all the while
Like some great clockwork crocodile.
At last, she put her gum away
Upon a special little tray,
And settled back and went to sleep -
(She managed this by counting sheep).
But now, how strange! Although she slept,
Those massive jaws of hers still kept
On chewing, chewing through the night,
Even with nothing there to bite.
They were, you see, in such a groove
They positively had to move.
And very grim it was to hear
In pitchy darkness, loud and clear,
This sleeping woman’s great big trap
Opening and shutting, snap-snap-snap!
Faster and faster, chop-chop-chop,
The noise went on, it wouldn’t stop.
Until at last her jaws decide
To pause and open extra wide,
And with the most tremendous chew
They bit the lady’s tongue-in two.
Thereafter, just from chewing gum,
Miss Bigelow was always dumb,
And spent her life shut up in some
Disgusting sanatorium.
And that is why we’ll try so hard
To save Miss Violet Beauregarde
From suffering an equal fate.
She’s still quite young. It’s not too late,
Provided she survives the cure.
We hope she does. We can’t be sure.’
21　再见，维奥莉特
21　再见，维奥莉特
“这片口香糖，”旺卡先生说下去，“是我最新、最伟大、最迷人的发明！这是一顿口香糖
大餐！这是……这是……这是……小小一片口香糖本身就是一顿有三道菜的大餐！”
“这都是什么废话！”一位爸爸说。
“我亲爱的先生，”旺卡先生叫道，“等到我一开始在商店出售这种口香糖，它将要改变一
切！它将是所有厨房和所有烹饪的末日！再也用不着到菜场去！再也用不着去买肉、买蔬菜
了！进餐时再也用不着餐刀、餐叉！再也用不着盘子！再也用不着洗碗碟！再也没有垃圾！
再也没有食堂！就小小一片旺卡的魔术口香糖，这将是你一日三餐——早餐、午晚、晚餐
——所需要的一切！我刚制造出来的这片口香糖就是番茄汤、烤牛肉、蓝莓馅饼，你几乎想
要什么就可以有什么！”
“它是番茄汤、烤牛肉、蓝莓馅饼，你这是什么意思？”维奥莉特•博雷加德问道。
“你只要动口一嚼，”旺卡先生说，“它就是你在菜单上能吃到的东西。真是非常惊人！你
可以实实在在地感到这种食物通过你的喉咙，进入你的肚子！你完全可以尝到它的味道！它
使你吃得饱饱的！它使你吃得心满意足！它真了不起！”
“这根本不可能。”维鲁卡•索尔特说。
“只要它是口香糖，”维奥莉特•博雷加德叫道，“只要它是一片口香糖，我就能够嚼，那么
它就是我的！”她赶快从嘴里拿出她那片创世界记录的口香糖，贴在左耳后面。“来吧，旺卡
先生，”她说，“把你这片魔术口香糖交给我，我们就能知道是不是这么一回事了。”
“喂，维奥莉特，”她的妈妈博雷加德太太说，“别做傻事，维奥莉特。”
“我要这片口香糖嘛！”维奥莉特固执地说，“傻在哪里？”
“我倒希望你不要吃它，”旺卡先生温和地劝她说，“你知道，我还没有把它完全调好。还
有一两个问题……”
“噢，让那见鬼去吧！”维奥莉特说。忽然之间，旺卡先生还没有来得及拦住她，她已经
迅速地伸出一只胖手，把那片口香糖从抽屉里抓起来，抛到嘴里去了。一下子，她久经训练
的上下颌像一把钳子似的，开始把它大嚼特嚼起来。
“不要嚼。”旺卡先生说。
“真妙啊！”维奥莉特叫道，“是番茄汤！又热，又有奶油味，又好吃！我能够感觉到汤流
进我的喉咙！”
“停下！”旺卡先生说，“这片口香糖还没有做成功！它还没有好！”
“它当然好了！”维奥莉特说，“它非常成功！噢，天哪，这是多么好的汤啊！”
“把它吐出来！”旺卡先生说。
“它的味道在改变！”维奥莉特叫道，同时又嚼又笑，“上第二道菜了！是烤牛肉！又嫩又
多汁！噢，天哪，味道多好啊！烤土豆的味道也好极了！皮很脆，里面满是牛油！”
“多么有趣啊，维奥莉特！”博雷加德太太说，“你真是一个聪明的小姑娘。”
“继续嚼吧，小宝贝！”博雷加德先生说，“就继续嚼下去吧！这是博雷加德家的一个重大
日子！我们的小女儿是世界上第一个吃口香糖大餐的人！”
所有的人看着维奥莉特•博雷加德站在那里嚼这片前所未有的口香糖。小查理•巴克特盯住
她完全出了神，看着她两片橡皮似的大嘴唇一张一合地在大嚼特嚼。约瑟夫爷爷站在他的身
边，也注视着这个小姑娘。旺卡先生绞着他的双手说：“不，不，不，不，不！它还没有做好
给人嚼呢！它还没好！你绝不能嚼它！”
“蓝莓馅饼和奶油！”维奥莉特叫道，“它来了！噢，天哪，没说的！真美！就像……就像
我在吞下它一样！就像我这么嚼着，就吞下了一大匙一大匙世界上最好吃的蓝莓馅饼！”
“天哪！乖女儿，”博雷加德太太看着维奥莉特忽然大声尖叫起来，“你的鼻子怎么啦？”
“噢，别说话，妈妈，让我把它吃完！”维奥莉特说。
“它在变成蓝色！”博雷加德太太哇哇大叫着，“你的鼻子在变成蓝色，跟蓝莓一样！”
“你妈妈说得对！”博雷加德先生叫道，“你的整只鼻子已经变成紫色了！”
“你们说什么？”维奥莉特一面说，一面还在大嚼特嚼。
“你的脸颊，”博雷加德太太叫着说，“它们也变成蓝色了！还有你的下巴！你的整张脸都
在变成蓝色！”
“马上把口香糖吐出来！”博雷加德先生命令她说。
“天哪！救救我们吧！”博雷加德太太哇哇大叫，“这姑娘的脸全变成蓝色，又变成紫色
了！连她的头发也在变色！维奥莉特，你现在变成紫罗兰色了，维奥莉特！你这是怎么啦？”
“我告诉过你们，我还没有完全调好。”旺卡先生难过地摇头叹气。
“我肯定你还没有调好！”博雷加德太太叫道，“你现在就看看这女孩吧！”
大家看着维奥莉特。她那副模样多么可怕，多么古怪呀！她的脸、手、脚、腿、脖子，
事实上，全身皮肤，包括她那头蓬松的鬈发，都已经变成光亮的紫蓝色，就是蓝莓汁的颜
色！
“每到吃甜品的时候总是出毛病，”旺卡先生叹气说，“都是那蓝莓馅饼出的毛病。不过这
个问题我总有一天会解决的，你们等着瞧吧！”
“维奥莉特！”博雷加德太太又哇哇大叫，“你肿胀起来了！”
“我想吐。”维奥莉特说。
“你在肿胀！”博雷加德太太又哇哇大叫。
“我觉得难受极了！”维奥莉特喘着气说。
“我并不觉得奇怪！”博雷加德先生说。
“天哪，乖女儿！”博雷加德太太尖声大叫，“你胀得像个气球一样了！”
“像个蓝莓。”旺卡先生说。
“快叫医生！”博雷加德先生喊道。
“用一根针刺破她！”有一位爸爸说。
“救救她吧！”博雷加德太太绞着双手大叫。
但现在已经没有办法救她了。她的身体在膨胀，形状变得真快，仅仅一分钟就变成了一
个蓝色的巨大圆球——一个巨型的蓝莓。维奥莉特•博雷加德本人原来的东西，现在保存下来
的就只有这巨型圆浆果上伸出来的一双细腿和两只细手臂，还有顶上的一个小脑袋了。
“总是这个样子，”旺卡先生叹口气说，“我在实验室里曾用二十名奥帕—伦帕人做过二十
次实验，他们每一个到头来都变成了蓝莓。这真叫人伤透了脑筋。我真不明白这是什么原
因。”
“我可不要一个蓝莓做我的女儿！”博雷加德太太大叫道，“马上把她变回原来的样子！”
旺卡先生弹弹他的手指，十名奥帕—伦帕人马上在他的身边出现。
“把这位博雷加德小姐滚到船上去。”他对他们说，“马上带她到榨汁车间。”
“榨汁车间？”博雷加德太太叫道，“他们在那里要把她怎么样？”
“榨她，”旺卡先生说，“我们得马上把她身上的果汁榨出来，榨完以后再看看她怎么样。
不过别担心，我亲爱的博雷加德太太，到了没有其他办法的时候，我们也会把她修补好的。
我对这件事感到抱歉。我实在是感到……”
那十名奥帕—伦帕人已经把这个巨型的蓝莓滚过发明室的地板，向着通往巧克力河的门
口滚去，船正在那里等着。博雷加德先生和他太太急忙跟着他们。其他的人，包括小查理•巴
克特和约瑟夫爷爷，一动不动地站着，目送他们离开。
“听！”查理低声说，“爷爷，听！船上那些奥帕—伦帕人又开始唱歌了！”
一百人的合唱队的歌声又响亮又清晰地传到房间里来：
亲爱的朋友们，大家必定同意，
这种事真是叫人生气，
竟看见一个讨厌的小坏蛋，
口香糖从早嚼到晚。
（这跟整天坐着挖鼻子，同样难看得要死。）
因此请相信我们的忠告，
嚼口香糖结果不会好。
这黏糊糊的劳什子，
要使嚼它的人最后也变得黏糊糊为止。
你们有没有人认识，
一个叫比格露的小姐？
这位可怕的小姐整天嚼啊嚼，
她并不认为嚼口香糖有什么不好。
她在浴缸里洗澡也嚼，
她上俱乐部跳舞也嚼，
她到教堂、乘公共汽车也嚼，
这实在是荒唐可笑！
当她找不到口香糖来嚼，
干脆就把地毯咬，
或者看到什么嚼什么——
靴子、邮递员的耳朵，
或者别人的内衣和裤子，
有一次还嚼她男朋友的鼻子。
她这样不停地嚼啊嚼啊，
最后嚼得肌肉特别发达，
巨大的下巴在她脸上，
鼓起来像小提琴一样。
她嚼啊嚼，年复一年，
一天要嚼口香糖五十片。
哎呀，直到一个夏天的晚上，
可怕事情出了一桩。
比格露小姐睡得很迟，
躺着看书，看了半个小时，
一面看书一面嚼口香糖，
吧嗒着嘴，像上了发条的大鳄鱼一样。
最后她把口香糖，
吐在一个专门的小碟子上。
她这才在床上躺，
数着羊儿，进入梦乡。
但这时候，也真奇怪，人虽睡着，
嘴里也没东西在嚼，
上下颌依然吧嗒动个不停，
嚼啊嚼啊直到天明。
这么嚼啊嚼啊已成习惯，
要她不嚼可真难办。
黑夜里听到这声音，
又大又清楚，叫人又怕又吃惊。
这睡着的小姐那张大嘴巴，
一张一闭——吧嗒，吧嗒，吧嗒！
愈来愈快——嗒！嗒！嗒！
没完没了，不肯停下。
直到她的上下颌终于决定停一下，
把嘴张得加倍大，
用最大的力量咬了一大口，
一下子咬断了这位小姐的舌头。
这样，就由于嚼口香糖，
比格露小姐从此话也不能讲，
关在令人讨厌的疗养院，
度过她的余年。
正是因为这个理由，
我们要尽力把维奥莉特•博雷加德小姐搭救，
使她不致陷于同样的不幸。
她年纪还小，只要好好看病，
还不算迟，希望她能被医好，
不过我们不敢担保。
22 Along the Corridor
22 Along the Corridor
‘Well, well, well,’ sighed Mr Willy Wonka, ‘two naughty little children gone. Three good
little children left. I think we’d better get out of this room quickly before we lose anyone
else!’
‘But Mr Wonka,’ said Charlie Bucket anxiously, ‘will Violet Beauregarde ever be all
right again or will she always be a blueberry?’
‘They’ll de-juice her in no time flat!’ declared Mr Wonka. ‘They’ll roll her into the de-
juicing machine, and she’ll come out just as thin as a whistle!’
‘But will she still be blue all over?’ asked Charlie.
‘She’ll be purple!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘A fine rich purple from head to toe! But there you
are! That’s what comes from chewing disgusting gum all day long!’
‘If you think gum is so disgusting,’ said Mike Teavee, ‘then why do you make it in
your factory?’
‘I do wish you wouldn’t mumble,’ said Mr Wonka. T can’t hear a word you’re saying.
Come on! Off we go! Hurry up! Follow me! We’re going into the corridors again!’ And so
saying, Mr Wonka scuttled across to the far end of the Inventing Room and went out
through a small secret door hidden behind a lot of pipes and stoves. The three remaining
children - Veruca Salt, Mike Teavee, and Charlie Bucket - together with the five
remaining grown-ups, followed after him.
Charlie Bucket saw that they were now back in one of those long pink corridors with
many other pink corridors leading out of it. Mr Wonka was rushing along in front,
turning left and right and right and left, and Grandpa Joe was saying, ‘Keep a good hold
of my hand, Charlie. It would be terrible to get lost in here.’
Mr Wonka was saying, ‘No time for any more messing about! We’ll never get anywhere
at the rate we’ve been going!’ And on he rushed, down the endless pink corridors, with
his black top hat perched on the top of his head and his plum-coloured velvet coat-tails
flying out behind him like a flag in the wind.
They passed a door in the wall. ‘No time to go in!’ shouted Mr Wonka. ‘Press on! Press
on!’
They passed another door, then another and another. There were doors every twenty
paces or so along the corridor now, and they all had something written on them, and
strange clanking noises were coming from behind several of them, and delicious smells
came wafting through the keyholes, and sometimes little jets of coloured steam shot out
from the cracks underneath.
Grandpa Joe and Charlie were half running and half walking to keep up with Mr
Wonka, but they were able to read what it said on quite a few of the doors as they
hurried by. EATABLE MARSHMALLOW PILLOWS, it said on one.
‘Marshmallow pillows are terrific!’ shouted Mr Wonka as he dashed by. ‘They’ll be all
the rage when I get them into the shops! No time to go in, though! No time to go in!’
LICKABLE WALLPAPER FOR NURSERIES, it said on the next door.
‘Lovely stuff, lickable wallpaper!’ cried Mr Wonka, rushing past. ‘It has pictures of
fruits on it - bananas, apples, oranges, grapes, pineapples, strawberries, and
snozzberries…’
‘Snozzberries?’ said Mike Teavee.
‘Don’t interrupt!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘The wallpaper has pictures of all these fruits
printed on it, and when you lick the picture of a banana, it tastes of banana. When you
lick a strawberry, it tastes of strawberry. And when you lick a snozzberry, it tastes just
exactly like a snozzberry…’
‘But what does a snozzberry taste like?’
‘You’re mumbling again,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Speak louder next time. On we go! Hurry
up!’
HOT ICE CREAMS FOR COLD DAYS, it said on the next door.
‘Extremely useful in the winter,’ said Mr Wonka, rushing on. ‘Hot ice cream warms you
up no end in freezing weather. I also make hot ice cubes for putting in hot drinks. Hot
ice cubes make hot drinks hotter.’
COWS THAT GIVE CHOCOLATE MILK, it said on the next door.
‘Ah, my pretty little cows!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘How I love those cows!’
‘But why can’t we see them?’ asked Veruca Salt. ‘Why do we have to go rushing on
past all these lovely rooms?’
‘We shall stop in time!’ called out Mr Wonka. ‘Don’t be so madly impatient!’
FIZZY LIFTING DRINKS, it said on the next door.
‘Oh, those are fabulous!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘They fill you with bubbles, and the bubbles
are full of a special kind of gas, and this gas is so terrifically lifting that it lifts you right
off the ground just like a balloon, and up you go until your head hits the ceiling - and
there you stay.’
‘But how do you come down again?’ asked little Charlie.
‘You do a burp, of course,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘You do a great big long rude burp, and up
comes the gas and down comes you! But don’t drink it outdoors! There’s no knowing
how high up you’ll be carried if you do that. I gave some to an old Oompa-Loompa once
out in the back yard and he went up and up and disappeared out of sight! It was very
sad. I never saw him again.’
‘He should have burped,’ Charlie said.
‘Of course he should have burped,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘I stood there shouting, “Burp, you
silly ass, burp, or you’ll never come down again!” But he didn’t or couldn’t or wouldn’t, I
don’t know which. Maybe he was too polite. He must be on the moon by now.’
On the next door, it said, SQUARE SWEETS THAT LOOK ROUND.
‘Wait!’ cried Mr Wonka, skidding suddenly to a halt. ‘I am very proud of my square
sweets that look round. Let’s take a peek.’
22　顺着走廊走
　　22　顺着走廊走
　　“哎呀！哎呀！哎呀！”威利•旺卡先生叹着气说，“两个淘气的小朋友离开了，现在只剩下三个好孩子。我想趁没有再丢掉什么人的时候，最好还是赶快离开这个房间！”
　　“可是，旺卡先生，”查理•巴克特担心地说，“维奥莉特•博雷加德会复原吗？还是永远是一个蓝莓呢？”
　　“他们会马上把她的果汁榨掉！”旺卡先生说，“他们把她滚进榨汁机，等到她出来，就会跟一个哨子那样瘦了！”
　　“不过她还是浑身蓝色吗？”查理问道。
　　“她会是紫色的！”旺卡先生叫道，“从头顶到脚趾是美丽鲜艳的紫色！就是这样！这就是整天从早到晚嚼讨厌的口香糖的结果！”
　　“既然你认为口香糖那么讨厌，”迈克•蒂维说，“为什么还在你的工厂里生产口香糖呢？”
　　“我真希望你不要老是嘟嘟哝哝，”旺卡先生说，“你说的话我一个字也听不清楚。来吧，我们走！快一点儿！跟着我！我们又要回到走廊去了！”旺卡先生说着，急奔到发明室的另一头，穿过一道隐藏在许多管子和炉子之间的秘密小门走出去。剩下的三个孩子——维鲁卡•索尔特、迈克•蒂维、查理•巴克特和五个大人一起跟在他的后面。
　　查理•巴克特发觉，他们现在又回到了那些粉红色长廊中的一条，又有许多粉红色走廊由它通出去。旺卡先生带头一路向前冲，朝左转，朝右转，朝右转，朝左转。约瑟夫爷爷说：“拉紧我的手，查理，要是在这里迷了路就糟糕了。”
　　旺卡先生一直在说：“不能再浪费时间了！用我们现在这个速度走，哪里也到不了！”他一直顺着那没有尽头的粉红色走廊向前冲。只见那顶黑礼帽扣在他的头顶上，那件漂亮的天鹅绒燕尾服的燕尾，在他背后像一面旗子在风中那样飞舞。
　　他们经过墙上的一道门。“没有时间进去了！”旺卡先生叫道，“赶紧跟上！赶紧跟上！”
　　他们又经过一道门，一道接一道。一路过去，走廊上每隔二十步左右就有一道门，门上全写着字。其中有好多道门里传出奇怪的丁当声，钥匙孔里钻出了香喷喷的气味，有时候从门缝下喷出一小股彩色的蒸气。
　　约瑟夫爷爷和查理半跑半走地紧跟着旺卡先生，但他们匆匆经过时，仍能看到好几道门上的字。其中一道门上写着：可吃的果汁枕头软糖。
　　“果汁枕头软糖，妙极了！”旺卡先生跑过时叫道，“等我把它们投放到商店里出售时，它们一定会引起轰动！不过你没有时间进去了！没有时间进去了！”
　　另一道门上写着：供婴儿室用的可舔墙纸。
　　“可舔墙纸是可爱的东西！”旺卡先生冲过时叫道，“上面有不同的水果——香蕉、苹果、葡萄、菠萝、橙子、草莓、鼻子浆果……”
　　“鼻子浆果？”迈克•蒂维问道。
　　“不要打岔！”旺卡先生说，“墙纸上印着这些水果的图案，舔香蕉就有香蕉味，舔草莓就有草莓味，舔鼻子浆果就正好是鼻子浆果的味道……”
　　“但鼻子浆果到底是什么味道呢？”
　　“你又嘟嘟哝哝了，”旺卡先生说，“下次你得说大声一点儿。我们走吧！走快点！”
　　下一道门上写着：冷天吃的热冰淇淋。
　　“它们极其适合在冬天吃，”旺卡先生一边跑一边说，“在寒冷的天气里，热冰淇淋能使你彻底暖和起来。我还制造热冰块，放到热饮料里去，能使热饮料更加热。”
　　下一道门上写着：产巧克力牛奶的母牛。
　　“啊，我美丽的小母牛啊！”旺卡先生叫道，“我多么爱这些母牛啊！”
　　“但我们为什么不能看看它们呢？”维鲁卡•索尔特问道，“为什么我们要奔过这些有趣的房间呢？”
　　“到时候我们会停下来的！”旺卡先生大声说，“不要那么没耐心！”
　　下一道门上写着：升高汽水。
　　“噢，那些东西真是不可思议！”旺卡先生叫道，“它们使你肚子里充满气泡。这些气泡里充满一种特殊的气体，这种气体有很强的升高能力，可以使你像气球一样从地面上升起来，升啊升啊，直到你的头碰到了天花板才会停下来。”
　　“可是怎样才可以再下来呢？”小查理问道。
　　“当然是打嗝啰，”旺卡先生说，“你狠狠地用力打嗝，气体上来，你就下去了！但千万不要在室外喝这种汽水！如果喝了，你就会无止境地升高。有一次在后院里，我给一个奥帕—伦帕老人喝了一点儿。他升啊升啊，升得连人都看不见了！真叫人难过。我到现在都没有再见过他！”
　　“他应该打嗝啊！”查理说。
　　“这个自然，”旺卡先生说，“我站在那里拼命叫，‘打嗝啊，你这蠢驴！打嗝啊，不然你永远也下不来了！’可是他没有打嗝，或者不能打嗝，或者不会打嗝，我也不知道是什么原因。
　　也许他太有礼貌了。他现在一定是在月亮上。”
　　下一道门上写着：看起来圆滚滚的方糖。
　　“等一等，”旺卡先生叫着，猛地停下了脚步，“我为这种看似圆形的方糖感到十分自豪。
　　让我们进去瞧一瞧吧。”
23 Square Sweets That Look Round
23 Square Sweets That Look Round
Everybody stopped and crowded to the door. The top half of the door was made of glass.
Grandpa Joe lifted Charlie up so that he could get a better view, and looking in, Charlie
saw a long table, and on the table there were rows and rows of small white square-
shaped sweets. The sweets looked very much like square sugar lumps - except that each
of them had a funny little pink face painted on one side. At the end of the table, a
number of Oompa-Loompas were busily painting more faces on more sweets.
‘There you are!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Square sweets that look round!’
‘They don’t look round to me,’ said Mike Teavee.
‘They look square,’ said Veruca Salt. ‘They look completely square.’
‘But they are square,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘I never said they weren’t.’
‘You said they were round!’ said Veruca Salt.
‘I never said anything of the sort,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘I said they looked round.’
‘But they don’t look round!’ said Veruca Salt.
‘They look square!’
‘They look round,’ insisted Mr Wonka.
‘They most certainly do not look round!’ cried Veruca Salt.
‘Veruca, darling,’ said Mrs Salt, ‘pay no attention to Mr Wonka! He’s lying to you!’
‘My dear old fish,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘go and boil your head!’
‘How dare you speak to me like that!’ shouted Mrs Salt.
‘Oh, do shut up,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Now watch this!’
He took a key from his pocket, and unlocked the door, and flung it open… and
suddenly… at the sound of the door opening, all the rows of little square sweets looked
quickly round to see who was coming in. The tiny faces actually turned towards the door
and stared at Mr Wonka.
‘There you are!’ he cried triumphantly. ‘They’re looking round! There’s no argument
about it! They are square sweets that look round!’
‘By golly, he’s right!’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘Come on!’ said Mr Wonka, starting off down the corridor again. ‘On we go! We
mustn’t dawdle!’
BUTTERSCOTCH AND BUTTERGIN, it said on the next door they passed.
‘Now that sounds a bit more interesting,’ said Mr Salt, Veruca’s father.
‘Glorious stuff!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘The Oompa-Loompas all adore it. It makes them
tiddly. Listen! You can hear them in there now, whooping it up.’
Shrieks of laughter and snatches of singing could be heard coming through the closed
door.
‘They’re drunk as lords,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘They’re drinking butterscotch and soda.
They like that best of all. Buttergin and tonic is also very popular. Follow me, please! We
really mustn’t keep stopping like this.’ He turned left. He turned right. They came to a
long flight of stairs. Mr Wonka slid down the banisters. The three children did the same.
Mrs Salt and Mrs Teavee, the only women now left in the party, were getting very out of
breath. Mrs Salt was a great fat creature with short legs, and she was blowing like a
rhinoceros. ‘This way!’ cried Mr Wonka, turning left at the bottom of the stairs.
‘Go slower!’ panted Mrs Salt.
‘Impossible,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘We should never get there in time if I did.’
‘Get where?’ asked Veruca Salt.
‘Never you mind,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘You just wait and see.’
23　看起来圆滚滚的方糖
23　看起来圆滚滚的方糖
所有的人停下来挤在门外。门的上半部分是玻璃的。约瑟夫爷爷把查理举起来，好让他
看得清楚些。查理望进去，看见一张长桌子上面放有一排排白色正方形的糖。这些糖看上去
非常像普通的方糖，只是每一块上面都画有一张粉红色的滑稽小脸。在桌子的一头，一些奥
帕—伦帕人正在忙着给更多的糖画上脸。
“瞧吧！”旺卡先生叫道，“这些就是看起来圆滚滚的方糖！”
“我觉得它们看起来一点儿也不圆。”迈克•蒂维说。
“它们看起来是方的。”维鲁卡•索尔特说，“它们看起来完全是方的。”
“它们本来就是方的，”旺卡先生说，“我从来没有说过它们不是方的。”
“你说它们是圆的！”维鲁卡•索尔特说。
“我从来没有说过这种话，”旺卡先生说，“我说它们看起来圆滚滚。”
“但它们看起来并不圆滚滚！”维鲁卡•索尔特说，“它们看起来是方的！”
“它们看起来圆滚滚！”旺卡先生坚持说。
“它们看起来百分之百不圆！”维鲁卡•索尔特叫起来。
“维鲁卡，小宝贝，”索尔特太太说，“不要听旺卡先生的！他在骗你！”
“我亲爱的老家伙，”旺卡先生说，“去你的吧！”
“你怎么敢这样对我说话！”索尔特太太大叫。
“噢，闭上你的嘴！”旺卡先生说，“现在瞧这个吧！”
他从衣袋里掏出一把钥匙，打开门锁，把门打开……忽然之间……一听到开门的声音，
一排排的小方糖立刻把眼睛睁圆，转过来看是谁进来了。那些眼睛确实瞪得圆滚滚的，向门
这边转过来盯着旺卡先生看。
“瞧！”他得意地叫道，“它们看起东西来圆滚滚！这是不必再争论的！它们是看起来圆滚
滚的方糖！”
“天哪，他的话是对的！”约瑟夫爷爷说。
“走吧！”旺卡先生说着，又顺着走廊走，“我们继续走吧！我们一定不能这样慢吞吞
的！”
他们经过的下一道门写道：牛油苏格兰威士忌糖和牛油杜松子酒糖。
“这些东西听起来更加有趣。”维鲁卡的爸爸索尔特先生说。
“了不起的东西！”旺卡先生说，“奥帕—伦帕人全都喜欢它们。它们使他们醉醺醺的。
听！你可以听到他们在里面狂欢。”
震耳的欢笑声和阵阵歌声从关着的门里传出来。
“他们烂醉如泥，”旺卡先生说，“他们在喝牛油苏格兰威士忌糖加苏打水。他们最喜欢这
个了。牛油杜松子酒糖加苏打水也很受欢迎。请跟我来吧！我们实在不应该这样停下来。”他
向左转，然后向右转。他们来到一个长楼梯边。旺卡先生坐在扶手上滑下去。三个孩子照着
他的样子做。剩下来的两位女士，索尔特太太和蒂维太太，已经气也透不过来了。索尔特太
太是个短腿大肥婆，这时她喘着气，像头犀牛一样。“这边来！”旺卡先生叫道，他在楼梯底
下向左转。
“走得稍慢一点儿！”索尔特太太喘着气说。
“不可能，”旺卡先生说，“走慢点我们就不能及时到达。”
“到哪里？”维鲁卡•索尔特问。
“你不用管，”旺卡先生说，“等着瞧就是了。”
24 Veruca in the Nut Room
24 Veruca in the Nut Room
Mr Wonka rushed on down the corridor. THE NUT ROOM, it said on the next door they
came to.
‘All right,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘stop here for a moment and catch your breath, and take a
peek through the glass panel of this door. But don’t go in! Whatever you do, don’t go
into THE NUT ROOM! If you go in, you’ll disturb the squirrels!’
Everyone crowded around the door.
‘Oh look, Grandpa, look!’ cried Charlie.
‘Squirrels!’ shouted Veruca Salt.
‘Crikey!’ said Mike Teavee.
It was an amazing sight. One hundred squirrels were seated upon high stools around a
large table. On the table, there were mounds and mounds of walnuts, and the squirrels
were all working away like mad, shelling the walnuts at a tremendous speed.
‘These squirrels are specially trained for getting the nuts out of walnuts,’ Mr Wonka
explained.
‘Why use squirrels?’ Mike Teavee asked. ‘Why not use Oompa-Loompas?’
‘Because,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘Oompa-Loompas can’t get walnuts out of walnut shells in
one piece. They always break them in two. Nobody except squirrels can get walnuts
whole out of walnut shells every time. It is extremely difficult. But in my factory, I insist
upon only whole walnuts. Therefore I have to have squirrels to do the job. Aren’t they
wonderful, the way they get those nuts out! And see how they first tap each walnut with
their knuckles to be sure it’s not a bad one! If it’s bad, it makes a hollow sound, and they
don’t bother to open it. They just throw it down the rubbish chute. There! Look! Watch
that squirrel nearest to us! I think he’s got a bad one now!’
They watched the little squirrel as he tapped the walnut shell with his knuckles. He
cocked his head to one side, listening intently, then suddenly he threw the nut over his
shoulder into a large hole in the floor.
‘Hey, Mummy!’ shouted Veruca Salt suddenly, ‘I’ve decided I want a squirrel! Get me
one of those squirrels!’
‘Don’t be silly, sweetheart,’ said Mrs Salt. ‘These all belong to Mr Wonka.’
‘I don’t care about that!’ shouted Veruca. ‘I want one. All I’ve got at home is two dogs
and four cats and six bunny rabbits and two parakeets and three canaries and a green
parrot and a turtle and a bowl of goldfish and a cage of white mice and a silly old
hamster! I want a squirrel!’
‘All right, my pet,’ Mrs Salt said soothingly. ‘Mummy’ll get you a squirrel just as soon
as she possibly can.’
‘But I don’t want any old squirrel!’ Veruca shouted. ‘I want a trained squirrel!’
At this point, Mr Salt, Veruca’s father, stepped forward. ‘Very well, Wonka,’ he said
importantly, taking out a wallet full of money, ‘how much d’you want for one of these
squirrels? Name your price.’
‘They’re not for sale,’ Mr Wonka answered. ‘She can’t have one.’
‘Who says I can’t!’ shouted Veruca. ‘I’m going in to get myself one this very minute!’
‘Don’t!’ said Mr Wonka quickly, but he was too late. The girl had already thrown open
the door and rushed in.
The moment she entered the room, one hundred squirrels stopped what they were
doing and turned their heads and stared at her with small black beady eyes.
Veruca Salt stopped also, and stared back at them. Then her gaze fell upon a pretty
little squirrel sitting nearest to her at the end of the table. The squirrel was holding a
walnut in its paws.
‘All right,’ Veruca said, ‘I’ll have you!’
She reached out her hands to grab the squirrel… but as she did so… in that first split
second when her hands started to go forward, there was a sudden flash of movement in
the room, like a flash of brown lightning, and every single squirrel around the table took
a flying leap towards her and landed on her body.
Twenty-five of them caught hold of her right arm, and pinned it down.
Twenty-five more caught hold of her left arm, and pinned that down.
Twenty-five caught hold of her right leg and anchored it to the ground.
Twenty-four caught hold of her left leg.
And the one remaining squirrel (obviously the leader of them all) climbed up on to
her shoulder and started tap-tap-tapping the wretched girl’s head with its knuckles.
‘Save her!’ screamed Mrs Salt. ‘Veruca! Come back! What are they doing to her?’
‘They’re testing her to see if she’s a bad nut,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘You watch.’
Veruca struggled furiously, but the squirrels held her tight and she couldn’t move. The
squirrel on her shoulder went tap-tap-tapping the side of her head with his knuckles.
Then all at once, the squirrels pulled Veruca to the ground and started carrying her
across the floor.
‘My goodness, she is a bad nut after all,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Her head must have sounded
quite hollow.’
Veruca kicked and screamed, but it was no use. The tiny strong paws held her tightly
and she couldn’t escape.
‘Where are they taking her?’ shrieked Mrs Salt.
‘She’s going where all the other bad nuts go,’ said Mr Willy Wonka. ‘Down the rubbish
chute.’
‘By golly, she is going down the chute!’ said Mr Salt, staring through the glass door at
his daughter.
‘Then save her!’ cried Mrs Salt.
‘Too late,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘She’s gone!’
And indeed she had.
‘But where?’ shrieked Mrs Salt, flapping her arms. ‘What happens to the bad nuts?
Where does the chute go to?’
‘That particular chute,’ Mr Wonka told her, ‘runs directly into the great big main
rubbish pipe which carries away all the rubbish from every part of the factory - all the
floor sweepings and potato peelings and rotten cabbages and fish heads and stuff like
that.’
‘Who eats fish and cabbage and potatoes in this factory, I’d like to know?’ said Mike
Teavee.
‘I do, of course,’ answered Mr Wonka. ‘You don’t think I live on cacao beans, do you?’
‘But… but… but…’ shrieked Mrs Salt, ‘where does the great big pipe go to in the
end?’
‘Why, to the furnace, of course,’ Mr Wonka said calmly. ‘To the incinerator.’
Mrs Salt opened her huge red mouth and started to scream.
‘Don’t worry,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘there’s always a chance that they’ve decided not to
light it today.’
‘A chance!’ yelled Mrs Salt. ‘My darling Veruca! She’ll… she’ll… she’ll be sizzled like a
sausage!’
‘Quite right, my dear,’ said Mr Salt. ‘Now see here, Wonka,’ he added, ‘I think you’ve
gone just a shade too far this time, I do indeed. My daughter may be a bit of a frump - I
don’t mind admitting it - but that doesn’t mean you can roast her to a crisp. I’ll have you
know I’m extremely cross about this, I really am.’
‘Oh, don’t be cross, my dear sir!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘I expect she’ll turn up again sooner
or later. She may not even have gone down at all. She may be stuck in the chute just
below the entrance hole, and if that’s the case, all you’ll have to do is go in and pull her
up again.’
Hearing this, both Mr and Mrs Salt dashed into the Nut Room and ran over to the hole
in the floor and peered in.
‘Veruca!’ shouted Mrs Salt. ‘Are you down there!’
There was no answer.
Mrs Salt bent further forward to get a closer look. She was now kneeling right on the
edge of the hole with her head down and her enormous behind sticking up in the air like
a giant mushroom. It was a dangerous position to be in. She needed only one tiny little
push… one gentle nudge in the right place… and that is exactly what the squirrels gave
her! Over she toppled, into the hole head first, screeching like a parrot.
‘Good gracious me!’ said Mr Salt, as he watched his fat wife go tumbling down the
hole, ‘what a lot of rubbish there’s going to be today!’ He saw her disappearing into the
darkness. ‘What’s it like down there, Angina?’ he called out. He leaned further forward.
The squirrels rushed up behind him…
‘Help!’ he shouted.
But he was already toppling forward, and down the chute he went, just as his wife
had done before him - and his daughter.
‘Oh dear!’ cried Charlie, who was watching with the others through the door, ‘what on
earth’s going to happen to them now?’
‘I expect someone will catch them at the bottom of the chute,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘But what about the great fiery incinerator?’ asked Charlie.
‘They only light it every other day,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Perhaps this is one of the days
when they let it go out. You never know… they might be lucky…’
‘Ssshh!’ said Grandpa Joe. ‘Listen! Here comes another song!’
From far away down the corridor came the beating of drums. Then the singing began.
‘Veruca Salt!’ sang the Oompa-Loompas.
‘ Veruca Salt, the little brute,
Has just gone down the rubbish chute
(And as we very rightly thought
That in a case like this we ought
To see the thing completely through,
We’ve polished off her parents, too).
Down goes Veruca! Down the drain!
And here, perhaps, we should explain
That she will meet, as she descends,
A rather different set of friends
To those that she has left behind -
These won’t be nearly so refined.
A fish head, for example, cut
This morning from a halibut.
“Hello! Good morning! How d’you do?
How nice to meet you! How are you?”
And then a little further down
A mass of others gather round:
A bacon rind, some rancid lard,
A loaf of bread gone stale and hard,
A steak that nobody could chew,
An oyster from an oyster stew,
Some liverwurst so old and grey
One smelled it from a mile away,
A rotten nut, a reeky pear,
A thing the cat left on the stair,
And lots of other things as well,
Each with a rather horrid smell.
These are Veruca’s new-foundfriends
That she will meet as she descends,
And this is the price she has to pay
For going so very far astray.
But now, my dears, we think you might
Be wondering - is it really right
That every single bit of blame
And all the scolding and the shame
Should fall upon Veruca Salt?
Is she the only one at fault?
For though she’s spoiled, and dreadfully so,
A girl can’t spoil herself,you know.
Who spoiled her, then? Ah, who indeed?
Who pandered to her every need?
Who turned her into such a brat?
Who are the culprits? Who did that?
Alas! You needn’t look so far
To find out who these sinners are.
They are (and this is very sad)
Her loving parents, MUM and DAD.
And that is why we’re glad they fell
Into the rubbish chute as well.’
24　维鲁卡在果仁车间
　　24　维鲁卡在果仁车间
　　旺卡先生顺着通道向前直冲。他们来到的下一道门上写着：果仁车间。
　　“好了，”旺卡先生说，“在这里停一下，让你们松口气；同时从这道门上的玻璃窗往里面看一下，但不要进去！什么都可以，就是不要进果仁车间！你们进去会打扰那些松鼠的！”
　　所有的人挤在门口。
　　“噢，看，爷爷，看哪！”查理叫道。
　　“松鼠！”维鲁卡•索尔特大叫起来。
　　“哟！”迈克•蒂维说。
　　这真是个奇观。一百只松鼠围坐在一张大桌子四周的高凳上。桌子上有大堆大堆的核桃，松鼠全都像疯了一样在用惊人的快速度剥核桃。
　　“这些松鼠受过把核桃肉从壳里剥出来的特殊训练。”旺卡先生解释说。
　　“为什么用松鼠？”迈克•蒂维问道，“为什么不用奥帕—伦帕人呢？”
　　“因为，”旺卡先生说，“奥帕—伦帕人不能把核桃肉完整地从壳里剥出来。他们总是把核桃肉弄成两块。除了松鼠，没有人能每次都把核桃肉整块地从壳里剥出来。这是极难做到的事。但是在我的工厂里，我坚持只用整块的核桃肉，因此我只好用松鼠来做这项工作。看它们剥核桃的样子是不是很出色？它们先用指关节敲敲每个核桃，看看是不是坏的！如果核桃是坏的，敲下去是空洞的声音，它们就没有必要再剥开它了，干脆把它扔进垃圾槽。瞧瞧那边！看看最靠近我们的那只松鼠吧！我想它正好碰到一个坏核桃！”
　　他们看着那只小松鼠用指关节敲敲那核桃的壳。它侧转着头仔细地听，接着把核桃往后面一抛，抛进了地板上的一个大洞。
　　“嘿，妈妈！”维鲁卡•索尔特忽然叫起来，“我决定了，我要一只松鼠！给我一只那样的松鼠吧！”
　　“别傻了，小心肝，”索尔特太太说，“这些松鼠都是旺卡先生的。”
　　“我不管！”维鲁卡呱呱大叫，“我就是要一只。在家里我有的只是两只狗、四只猫、六只兔子、两只长尾小鹦鹉、三只金丝雀、一只绿鹦鹉、一只乌龟、一缸金鱼、一笼白鼠和一只傻乎乎的老松鼠！我要一只松鼠！”
　　“好吧，我的宝贝，”索尔特太太安慰她说，“妈妈一有机会就给你弄一只。”
　　“但我不要别的老松鼠！”维鲁卡大叫，“我只要一只受过训练的松鼠！”
　　这时候，维鲁卡的爸爸索尔特先生上前一步。“很好，旺卡先生，”他神气活现地说着，掏出一个鼓鼓的钱包，“要一只这种松鼠，你要多少钱？说出你的价钱吧！”
　　“它们是不卖的，”旺卡先生回答说，“她得不到的。”
　　“谁说我得不到！”维鲁卡大叫，“我现在就进去自己弄一只！”
　　“别去！”旺卡先生连忙说，但已经迟了，那女孩早已推开门冲了进去。
　　就在她走进房间的一刹那，一百只松鼠停下了它们的工作，转过头来，用黑珠子般的小眼睛盯着她。
　　维鲁卡•索尔特也停下来看着它们。她的视线落在一只漂亮的小松鼠身上。那只松鼠坐在桌子头上最靠近她的位子上，它正用爪子抓住一个核桃。
　　“好，”维鲁卡说，“我就要你吧！”
　　她伸出双手去抓这只松鼠……但就在她这样做……就在她的手开始伸过去的一刹那，房间里忽然像掠过一道棕色闪电，桌子四周的每一只松鼠同时向她飞扑过来，落到她的身上。
　　二十五只松鼠抓住她的右臂，把它按下去。
　　二十五只松鼠抓住她的左臂，把它按下去。
　　二十五只松鼠抓住她的右腿，使它在地上不能动。
　　二十四只松鼠抓住她的左腿。
　　剩下来的一只松鼠（显然是它们的首领）爬上她的肩头，开始用它的指关节嗒嗒嗒地敲这坏女孩的脑袋。
　　“救救她呀！”索尔特太太哇哇大叫，“维鲁卡，回来！它们要把她怎么样啊？”
　　“它们在检验她是不是一个坏坚果，”旺卡先生说，“你看着吧！”
　　维鲁卡拼命挣扎，但松鼠们把她牢牢抓紧，她连动也不能动。她肩上的那只松鼠继续用指关节嗒嗒嗒地敲她的脑袋。
　　突然，那一大群松鼠把维鲁卡拉翻在地，把她拖过地板。
　　“我的天，她竟是个坏坚果，”旺卡先生说，“她的头发出的声音是空洞的。”
　　维鲁卡又踢脚又哇哇大叫，但是没有用。那些有力的小爪子把她紧紧抓住，她想逃也逃不掉。
　　“它们要把她拖到哪里去？”索尔特太太尖叫。
　　“她要去其他坏核桃去的地方，”威利•旺卡先生说，“下那条垃圾滑槽。”
　　“天哪，她在下那条垃圾滑槽！”索尔特先生透过玻璃门看着他的女儿说。
　　“那么救她呀！”索尔特太太大叫。
　　“来不及了，”旺卡先生说，“她已经下去了！”
　　她的确已经下去了。
　　“可是要到哪里去？”索尔特太太摆动着双臂尖声大叫，“那些坏核桃到底会怎样？滑槽通到哪里去呢？”
　　“那特殊的滑槽，”旺卡先生告诉她，“直接通到大的垃圾总滑槽。它带走工厂里每个部门的垃圾——所有扫地扫出来的垃圾：土豆皮、烂卷心菜、鱼头和诸如此类的东西。”
　　“我倒想知道，在这家工厂里谁吃鱼和卷心菜呢？”迈克•蒂维问道。
　　“当然是我！”旺卡先生回答，“你不会以为我就靠吃可可豆过日子吧？”
　　“可是……可是……可是……”索尔特太太尖声大叫，“这条大垃圾总滑槽最后又通到什么地方去呢？”
　　“那还用说，当然是通到锅炉那里去，”旺卡先生平静地说，“通到焚化炉。”
　　索尔特太太张开她的血盆大口，开始哇哇大叫。
　　“不用担心，”旺卡先生说，“可能今天他们不生炉子，这种侥幸的机会总是可能有的。”
　　“侥幸的机会？”索尔特太太大叫，“我的小宝贝维鲁卡，她就要……她就要……她就要像一根香肠那样被烤得吱吱响了！”
　　“一点儿不错，我亲爱的。”索尔特先生说。“现在听我说，旺卡，”他补充说，“我认为你这一次做得就是过分一点了，我的确这样认为。我女儿的脾气可能是坏了点，这我不得不承认，但是这不等于说你就可以把她烤成松脆炸肉。我要告诉你，我对这件事极其生气，我的确生气。”
　　“去吧，不要生气了，我亲爱的先生！”旺卡先生说，“我希望她迟早会出来。她甚至可能没有下到锅炉里，只是卡在滑槽口下面。如果是这样，你只要进去把她拉出来就是了。”
　　一听这话，索尔特先生和他太太马上冲进果仁车间，跑到地上的洞边去，赶紧往里面看。
　　“维鲁卡！”索尔特太太叫道，“你在下面吗？”
　　没有回答。
　　索尔特太太向前把腰弯得更低，要近一点儿看。她现在跪在洞边了，头向下，大屁股翘起来像个大蘑菇。这种姿势实在危险，只要轻轻一推——在适当的位置上轻轻一碰，而这正是松鼠们对她所做的！
　　她一个倒栽葱，头朝下落到洞里去了，像只鹦鹉那样尖叫着。
　　“我的天！”索尔特先生看到他的胖太太翻身落下洞去就说，“今天的垃圾将是多么多啊！”他看着太太落进黑洞消失了。“下面是什么样子的，安吉娜？”他大叫着，把身体再往前探出去。
　　松鼠们在他后面冲过来……
　　“救命啊！”他大叫一声。
　　但他已经一个倒栽葱落下滑槽，就像他的太太和女儿先前一样。
　　“噢，天哪！”查理叫道，他和其他人一起透过玻璃门看着，“现在他们会发生什么事呢？”
　　“我希望在滑槽底下会有人接住他们。”旺卡先生说。
　　“可那烈火熊熊的焚化炉怎么样？”查理问道。
　　“他们只是隔一天烧一次，”旺卡先生说，“也许今天正好不烧。说不定……他们也许运气好……”
　　“嘘嘘嘘！”约瑟夫爷爷说，“听，又一首歌唱起来了！”
　　从走廊下面的远处传来了鼓声。接着奥帕—伦帕人的歌声便开始了。
　　维鲁卡•索尔特！
　　维鲁卡•索尔特这个野蛮小妞，
　　刚落到垃圾槽里头。
　　（我们的想法完全合理，
　　碰到这样的事，
　　我们应该彻底处理，
　　连同她的爸爸妈妈一起。）
　　维鲁卡落下去！沿着垃圾槽落下去！
　　我们也许应该解释几句。
　　她沿着垃圾槽落到下头，
　　将要遇到一群完全不同的朋友。
　　和她离开的那些朋友根本不同，
　　这些朋友一点儿也不高尚。
　　比方说，她会遇见一个鱼头，
　　是今天早晨杀比目鱼时所丢。
　　“喂，你早！
　　很高兴见到你！你好！”
　　再下去一点儿，
　　还有很多东西她会遇见：
　　熏肉的皮，臭猪油，
　　又干又硬的面包块，
　　一块谁也嚼不动的牛肉，
　　一只煨蚝，已经发臭，
　　一些肝香肠，早已发霉，
　　两千米外就能闻到臭味，
　　一块坏果仁，一个烂梨，
　　一些猫在楼梯上吃剩的东西。
　　还有许许多多别的垃圾，
　　每样都是臭气扑鼻。
　　这些便是维鲁卡的新朋友，
　　等她下去，就会碰头。
　　这代价她只好付出，
　　因为她以往误入歧途。
　　不过亲爱的朋友，你们大家，
　　可能会有不同的想法：
　　是否该把所有的过错，
　　全都推给维鲁卡•索尔特一个？
　　难道光她一个该受罚？
　　难道错的只是她？
　　虽然她被宠得厉害，
　　但她不会自己把自己宠坏。
　　那么是谁宠坏她呢？啊，到底是什么人？
　　是谁对她有求必应、百依百顺？
　　是谁使她变成这样坏的小妞？
　　是谁干的？谁是罪魁祸首？
　　天哪！各位不必用望远镜，
　　到远处去找这些罪人。
　　他们（说出来叫人难受极啦），
　　就是她亲爱的妈妈和爸爸。
　　正因为这个缘故，我们很高兴，
　　他们也一起落到垃圾槽当中。
25 The Great Glass Lift
25 The Great Glass Lift
‘I’ve never seen anything like it!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘The children are disappearing like
rabbits! But you mustn’t worry about it! They’ll all come out in the wash!’
Mr Wonka looked at the little group that stood beside him in the corridor. There were
only two children left now - Mike Teavee and Charlie Bucket. And there were three
grown-ups, Mr and Mrs Teavee and Grandpa Joe. ‘Shall we move on?’ Mr Wonka asked.
‘Oh, yes!’ cried Charlie and Grandpa Joe, both together.
‘My feet are getting tired,’ said Mike Teavee. ‘I want to watch television.’
‘If you’re tired then we’d better take the lift,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘It’s over here. Come on!
In we go!’ He skipped across the passage to a pair of double doors. The doors slid open.
The two children and the grown-ups went in.
‘Now then,’ cried Mr Wonka, ‘which button shall we press first? Take your pick!’
Charlie Bucket stared around him in astonishment. This was the craziest lift he had
ever seen. There were buttons everywhere! The walls, and even the ceiling, were covered
all over with rows and rows and rows of small, black push buttons! There must have
been a thousand of them on each wall, and another thousand on the ceiling! And now
Charlie noticed that every single button had a tiny printed label beside it telling you
which room you would be taken to if you pressed it.
‘This isn’t just an ordinary up-and-down lift!’ announced Mr Wonka proudly. ‘This lift
can go sideways and longways and slantways and any other way you can think of! It can
visit any single room in the whole factory, no matter where it is! You simply press the
button… and zing!… you’re off!’
‘Fantastic!’ murmured Grandpa Joe. His eyes were shining with excitement as he
stared at the rows of buttons.
‘The whole lift is made of thick, clear glass!’ Mr Wonka declared. ‘Walls, doors,
ceiling, floor, everything is made of glass so that you can see out!’
‘But there’s nothing to see,’ said Mike Teavee.
‘Choose a button!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘The two children may press one button each. So
take your pick! Hurry up! In every room, something delicious and wonderful is being
made.’
Quickly, Charlie started reading some of the labels alongside the buttons.
THE ROCK-CANDY MINE - 10,000 FEET DEEP, it said on one.
COKERNUT-ICE SKATING RINKS, it said on another.
Then… STRAWBERRY-JUICE WATER PISTOLS.
TOFFEE-APPLE TREES FOR PLANTING OUT IN YOUR GARDEN - ALL SIZES.
EXPLODING SWEETS FOR YOUR ENEMIES.
LUMINOUS LOLLIES FOR EATING IN BED AT NIGHT.
MINT JUJUBES FOR THE BOY NEXT DOOR - THEY’LL GIVE HIM GREEN TEETH FOR
A MONTH.
CAVITY-FILLING CARAMELS - NO MORE DENTISTS.
STICKJAW FOR TALKATIVE PARENTS.
WRIGGLE- SWEETS THAT WRIGGLE DELIGHTFULLY IN YOUR TUMMY AFTER
SWALLOWING.
INVISIBLE CHOCOLATE BARS FOR EATING IN CLASS.
SUGAR-COATED PENCILS FOR SUCKING.
FIZZY LEMONADE SWIMMING POOLS.
MAGIC HAND-FUDGE - WHEN YOU HOLD IT IN YOUR HAND, YOU TASTE IT IN
YOUR MOUTH.
RAINBOW DROPS - SUCK THEM AND YOU CAN SPIT IN SIX DIFFERENT COLOURS.
‘Come on, come on!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘We can’t wait all day!’
‘Isn’t there a Television Room in all this lot?’ asked Mike Teavee.
‘Certainly there’s a television room,’ Mr Wonka said. ‘That button over there.’ He
pointed with his finger. Everybody looked. TELEVISION CHOCOLATE, it said on the tiny
label beside the button.
‘Whoopee!’ shouted Mike Teavee. ‘That’s for me!’ He stuck out his thumb and pressed
the button. Instantly, there was a tremendous whizzing noise. The doors clanged shut
and the lift leaped away as though it had been stung by a wasp. But it leapt sideways!
And all the passengers (except Mr Wonka, who was holding on to a strap from the
ceiling) were flung off their feet on to the floor.
‘Get up, get up!’ cried Mr Wonka, roaring with laughter. But just as they were
staggering to their feet, the lift changed direction and swerved violently round a corner.
And over they went once more.
‘Help!’ shouted Mrs Teavee.
‘Take my hand, madam,’ said Mr Wonka gallantly. ‘There you are! Now grab this
strap! Everybody grab a strap. The journey’s not over yet!’
Old Grandpa Joe staggered to his feet and caught hold of a strap. Little Charlie, who
couldn’t possibly reach as high as that, put his arms around Grandpa Joe’s legs and hung
on tight.
The lift rushed on at the speed of a rocket. Now it was beginning to climb. It was
shooting up and up and up on a steep slanty course as if it were climbing a very steep
hill. Then suddenly, as though it had come to the top of the hill and gone over a
precipice, it dropped like a stone and Charlie felt his tummy coming right up into his
throat, and
Grandpa Joe shouted, ‘Yippee! Here we go!’ and Mrs Teavee cried out, ‘The rope has
broken! We’re going to crash!’ And Mr Wonka said, ‘Calm yourself, my dear lady,’ and
patted her comfortingly on the arm. And then Grandpa Joe looked down at Charlie who
was clinging to his legs, and he said, ‘Are you all right, Charlie?’ Charlie shouted, ‘I love
it! It’s like being on a roller coaster!’ And through the glass walls of the lift, as it rushed
along, they caught sudden glimpses of strange and wonderful things going on in some of
the other rooms:
An enormous spout with brown sticky stuff oozing out of it on to the floor…
A great, craggy mountain made entirely of fudge, with Oompa-Loompas (all roped
together for safety) hacking huge hunks of fudge out of its sides…
A machine with white powder spraying out of it like a snowstorm…
A lake of hot caramel with steam coming off it…
A village of Oompa-Loompas, with tiny houses and streets and hundreds of Oompa-
Loompa children no more than four inches high playing in the streets…
And now the lift began flattening out again, but it seemed to be going faster than
ever, and Charlie could hear the scream of the wind outside as it hurtled forward… and
it twisted… and it turned… and it went up… and it went down… and…
‘I’m going to be sick!’ yelled Mrs Teavee, turning green in the face.
‘Please don’t be sick,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘Try and stop me!’ said Mrs Teavee.
‘Then you’d better take this,’ said Mr Wonka, and he swept his magnificent black top
hat off his head, and held it out, upside down, in front of Mrs Teavee’s mouth.
‘Make this awful thing stop!’ ordered Mr Teavee.
‘Can’t do that,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘It won’t stop till we get there. I only hope no one’s
using the other lift at this moment.’
‘What other lift?’ screamed Mrs Teavee.
‘The one that goes the opposite way on the same track as this one,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘Holy mackerel!’ cried Mr Teavee. ‘You mean we might have a collision?’
‘I’ve always been lucky so far,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘Now I am going to be sick!’ yelled Mrs Teavee.
‘No, no!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Not now! We’re nearly there! Don’t spoil my hat!’
The next moment, there was a screaming of brakes, and the lift began to slow down.
Then it stopped altogether.
‘Some ride!’ said Mr Teavee, wiping his great sweaty face with a handkerchief.
‘Never again!’ gasped Mrs Teavee. And then the doors of the lift slid open and Mr
Wonka said, ‘Just a minute now! Listen to me! I want everybody to be very careful in
this room. There is dangerous stuff around in here and you must not tamper with it.’
25　玻璃大电梯
25　玻璃大电梯
“这样的事我从来没有见过！”旺卡先生叫道，“孩子们像兔子一样一个个不见了！不过你
们不用担心，他们全都会从管子里出来的！”
旺卡先生看着走廊上站在他身边的几个人。现在只剩下了两个孩子——迈克•蒂维和查理•
巴克特，还有三个大人——蒂维先生、蒂维太太和约瑟夫爷爷。“我们继续走，好吗？”旺卡
先生问道。
“噢，好的！”查理和约瑟夫爷爷两个异口同声地说。
“我的脚累了，”迈克•蒂维说，“我想看电视。”
“如果你累了，那么我们还是乘电梯吧，”旺卡先生说，“电梯就在这里。来吧，我们进
去！”他穿过通道来到电梯的双扇门前。电梯门打开了，两个孩子和大人们走了进去。
“好，”旺卡先生叫道，“我们先按哪一个按钮好呢？你们挑吧！”
查理•巴克特惊奇地环视四周，这是他见过的电梯中最古怪的。到处都是按钮！四面墙
上，甚至天花板上，全是一排一排的黑色小按钮！每边墙上至少有一千个，天花板上还有一
千个！查理还看到，每个按钮旁边都有一个印着字的小标签，告诉乘客按这个按钮，电梯将
把他送到哪一个房间。
“这不是一部普通的电梯！”旺卡先生自豪地宣布，“这电梯能横开、直开、斜开，向你所
想的任何方向开！它能到整座工厂的任何一个车间，不管这车间在哪里！你只要一按按
钮……呜……就开去了！”
“不可思议！”约瑟夫爷爷咕哝道。他盯住那一排一排的按钮，眼睛闪着兴奋的亮光。
“整部电梯是用明亮的厚玻璃造的！”旺卡先生说，“墙、门、天花板、地板，全都是玻璃
的，因此你们可以看到外面！”
“但是没有东西可以看。”迈克•蒂维说。
“挑选一个按钮吧！”旺卡先生说，“两个小朋友可以各按一个。你们挑选吧！快一点儿！
每个车间里都在制造绝妙的、好吃的东西呢！”
查理开始很快地看按钮旁边的小标签。
一张上面写着：糖矿——深三千米。
另一张写着：椰子溜冰场。
还有……草莓汁水枪。
太妃糖苹果树——适合种在你家花园中，大小俱全。
爆炸糖果——请你的敌人吃。
发光硬糖——供夜间在床上吃。
薄荷枣味胶糖——给邻居小孩吃，可使他的牙齿变绿一个月。
补牙软糖——从此不再需要牙科医生。
黏嘴糖——给话说得太多的父母吃。
蠕动糖——吃后在腹中蠕动，令人快慰。
隐形巧克力糖——供上课时吃。
糖衣铅笔——供吮吸。
柠檬汽水游泳池。
魔术手握牛奶软糖——握在手中，甜在嘴里。
彩虹糖豆——吮一口，吐出六种颜色的口水。
“按吧，按吧！”旺卡先生大叫，“我们不能整天等着！”
“在那么多房间里，有一间电视室吗？”迈克•蒂维问道。
“当然有，”旺卡先生说，“只需按那边那个按钮。”他用手指指着。大家看过去，那个按
钮旁边的小标签上写着：电视巧克力糖。
“好啊！”迈克•蒂维大叫，“那是专门为我准备的！”他伸出大拇指把那个按钮一按，马上
响起很响的嘶嘶声。电梯门哐当一声关上，电梯像是被黄蜂蜇了一口，一下子跳起来走了。
但它是朝旁边开走的！所有的乘客（除了旺卡先生，他正抓住从天花板上吊下来的皮带）都
被摇晃得跌倒在地。
“起来，起来！”旺卡先生叫着，哈哈大笑。但当他们刚摇摇晃晃地站起来时，电梯突然
改变了方向，转了个大弯。他们又一次跌倒了。
“救命啊！”蒂维太太叫道。
“握住我的手，太太，”旺卡先生殷勤地说，“好了！现在抓住这根皮带！各位请抓住皮
带！旅程还没有结束呢！”
约瑟夫爷爷摇摇晃晃地站起来抓住一根皮带。小查理因为不够高，只好用双臂抱紧约瑟
夫爷爷的腿。
电梯用火箭的速度飞驰。现在它开始向上升了。它陡斜地向上直升，好像在爬一座陡峭
的山。忽然之间，它像是已经来到山顶，越过了一个悬崖，一下子像石头一样落下来。查理
只觉得胃都冒到了喉咙，约瑟夫爷爷却大叫起来：“好啊！我们往下去！”蒂维太太喊起
来：“缆绳断了！我们要撞得粉身碎骨了！”“镇静点，我亲爱的女士。”旺卡先生说着，拍拍
她的手臂安慰她。约瑟夫爷爷低头看着紧抱住他双腿的查理说：“你没事吧，查理？”查理叫
道：“我爱这样！像是坐过山车！”电梯一路直冲时，透过玻璃墙，可以看到一些车间闪过，
里面正在进行着奇怪而惊人的工作：
一根巨大的喷管把棕色的黏液喷到地板上……
在一座崎岖不平、全部由牛奶软糖构成的大山上，奥帕—伦帕人正悬挂在上面（全用绳
子绑在一起以保安全），从四面八方劈下大块大块的牛奶软糖……
一部机器喷洒出白色的粉末，像刮起了暴风雪……
一个滚烫的焦糖湖，热气腾腾……
一座奥帕—伦帕人的村子，有小房子、小街道、几百个四英寸左右高的奥帕—伦帕孩子
在街上玩耍……
这时，电梯重新开始在平面上滑行，但似乎开得比刚才更快，查理能听到它向前飞驰时
外面的嗖嗖风声……它绕来绕去……先拐弯……它向上……它下来……它……
“我要吐了！”蒂维太太大叫着，面色发青。
“请不要吐。”旺卡先生说。
“我忍不住了！”蒂维太太说。
“那么，你最好吐在这里面。”旺卡先生说着，从头上摘下他那顶与众不同的高顶黑礼
帽，翻过来递到蒂维太太的嘴前。
“让这该死的东西停下！”蒂维先生命令道。
“这办不到，”旺卡先生说，“不到达目的地是不会停下来的。我只希望这时候不会有人在
使用另一部电梯。”
“什么另一部电梯？”蒂维太太尖叫。
“跟这电梯同一条线路开，但方向相反的。”旺卡先生说。
“天哪！”蒂维先生大叫，“你是说我们可能相撞？”
“不过我到现在为止一直福星高照，电梯还没有相撞过。”旺卡先生说。
“现在我要吐了！”蒂维太太叫道。
“不！不！”旺卡先生说，“现在不要吐！我们快到了！别糟蹋了我的帽子！”
转眼间响起了刹车的尖利的声音，电梯开始慢下来，接着它完全停下了。
“不妨再乘一次！”蒂维先生说着，用手帕擦他满是汗的脸。
“永远不要再乘了！”蒂维太太喘着气说。
接着电梯门打开，旺卡先生说：“现在先等一等，好好听我说！我要求每个人在这车间里
要非常小心。这里到处都有危险的东西，你们一定不要乱动。”
26 The Television-Chocolate Room
26 The Television-Chocolate Room
The Teavee family, together with Charlie and Grandpa Joe, stepped out of the lift into a
room so dazzlingly bright and dazzlingly white that they screwed up their eyes in pain
and stopped walking. Mr Wonka handed each of them a pair of dark glasses and said,
‘Put these on quick! And don’t take them off in here whatever you do! This light could
blind you!’
As soon as Charlie had his dark glasses on, he was able to look around him in comfort.
He saw a long narrow room. The room was painted white all over. Even the floor was
white, and there wasn’t a speck of dust anywhere. From the ceiling, huge lamps hung
down and bathed the room in a brilliant blue-white light. The room was completely bare
except at the far ends. At one of these ends there was an enormous camera on wheels,
and a whole army of Oompa-Loompas was clustering around it, oiling its joints and
adjusting its knobs and polishing its great glass lens. The Oompa- Loompas were all
dressed in the most extraordinary way. They were wearing bright- red space suits,
complete with helmets and goggles - at least they looked like space suits - and they
were working in complete silence. Watching them, Charlie experienced a queer sense of
danger. There was something dangerous about this whole business, and the Oompa-
Loompas knew it. There was no chattering or singing among them here, and they moved
about over the huge black camera slowly and carefully in their scarlet space suits.
At the other end of the room, about fifty paces away from the camera, a single
Oompa-Loompa (also wearing a space suit) was sitting at a black table gazing at the
screen of a very large television set.
‘Here we go!’ cried Mr Wonka, hopping up and down with excitement. ‘This is the
Testing Room for my very latest and greatest invention - Television Chocolate!’
‘But what is Television Chocolate?’ asked Mike Teavee.
‘Good heavens, child, stop interrupting me!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘It works by television. I
don’t like television myself. I suppose it’s all right in small doses, but children never
seem to be able to take it in small doses. They want to sit there all day long staring and
staring at the screen…’
‘That’s me!’ said Mike Teavee.
‘Shut up!’ said Mr Teavee.
‘Thank you,’ said Mr Wonka. T shall now tell you how this amazing television set of
mine works. But first of all, do you know how ordinary television works? It is very
simple. At one end, where the picture is being taken, you have a large ciné camera and
you start photographing something. The photographs are then split up into millions of
tiny little pieces which are so small that you can’t see them, and these little pieces are
shot out into the sky by electricity. In the sky, they go whizzing around all over the
place until suddenly they hit the antenna on the roof of somebody’s house. They then go
flashing down the wire that leads right into the back of the television set, and in there
they get jiggled and joggled around until at last every single one of those millions of tiny
pieces is fitted back into its right place (just like a jigsaw puzzle), and presto! - the
photograph appears on the screen…’
‘That isn’t exactly how it works,’ Mike Teavee said.
‘I am a little deaf in my left ear,’ Mr Wonka said. ‘You must forgive me if I don’t hear
everything you say.’
‘I said, that isn’t exactly how it works!’ shouted Mike Teavee.
‘You’re a nice boy,’ Mr Wonka said, ‘but you talk too much. Now then! The very first
time I saw ordinary television working, I was struck by a tremendous idea. “Look here!”
I shouted. “If these people can break up a photograph into millions of pieces and send the
pieces whizzing through the air and then put them together again at the other end, why
can’t I do the same thing with a bar of chocolate? Why can’t I send a real bar of
chocolate whizzing through the air in tiny pieces and then put the pieces together at the
other end, all ready to be eaten?” ’
‘Impossible!’ said Mike Teavee.
‘You think so?’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Well, watch this! I shall now send a bar of my very
best chocolate from one end of this room to the other by television! Get ready, there!
Bring in the chocolate!’
Immediately, six Oompa-Loompas marched forward carrying on their shoulders the
most enormous bar of chocolate Charlie had ever seen. It was about the size of the
mattress he slept on at home.
‘It has to be big,’ Mr Wonka explained, ‘because whenever you send something by
television, it always comes out much smaller than it was when it went in. Even with
ordinary television, when you photograph a big man, he never comes out on your screen
any taller than a pencil, does he? Here we go, then! Get ready! No, no! Stop! Hold
everything! You there! Mike Teavee! Stand back! You’re too close to the camera! There
are dangerous rays coming out of that thing! They could break you up into a million tiny
pieces in one second! That’s why the Oompa-Loompas are wearing space suits! The suits
protect them! All right! That’s better! Now, then! Switch on!’
One of the Oompa-Loompas caught hold of a large switch and pulled it down.
There was a blinding flash.
‘The chocolate’s gone!’ shouted Grandpa Joe, waving his arms.
He was quite right! The whole enormous bar of chocolate had disappeared completely
into thin air!
‘It’s on its way!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘It is now rushing through the air above our heads in
a million tiny pieces. Quick! Come over here!’ He dashed over to the other end of the
room where the large television set was standing, and the others followed him. ‘Watch
the screen!’ he cried. ‘Here it comes! Look!’
The screen flickered and lit up. Then suddenly, a small bar of chocolate appeared in
the middle of the screen.
‘Take it!’ shouted Mr Wonka, growing more and more excited.
‘How can you take it?’ asked Mike Teavee, laughing. ‘It’s just a picture on a television
screen!’
‘Charlie Bucket!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘You take it! Reach out and grab it!’
Charlie put out his hand and touched the screen, and suddenly, miraculously, the bar
of chocolate came away in his fingers. He was so surprised he nearly dropped it.
‘Eat it!’ shouted Mr Wonka. ‘Go on and eat it! It’ll be delicious! It’s the same bar! It’s
got smaller on the journey, that’s all!’
‘It’s absolutely fantastic!’ gasped Grandpa Joe. ‘It’s… it’s… it’s a miracle!’
‘Just imagine,’ cried Mr Wonka, ‘when I start using this across the country… you’ll be
sitting at home watching television and suddenly a commercial will flash on to the
screen and a voice will say, “EAT WONKA’S CHOCOLATES! THEY’RE THE BEST IN THE
WORLD! IF YOU DON’T BELIEVE US, TRY ONE FOR YOURSELF - NOW!” And you
simply reach out and take one! How about that, eh?’
‘Terrific!’ cried Grandpa Joe. ‘It will change the world!’
26　电视巧克力糖车间
26　电视巧克力糖车间
蒂维一家人，还有查理和约瑟夫爷爷，从电梯里出来，走进一个房间。房间亮得刺眼，
白得刺眼，他们的眼睛痛得眯起来，因此停下不动。旺卡先生给每人一副墨镜，说：“马上戴
上！在这里不管做什么事都不能把它摘下来！这些光会弄瞎你们的眼睛的！”
查理一戴上墨镜，就能舒舒服服地向四面看了。他看到这是一个窄长的房间。房间全部
漆成白色，连地板也是白的，到处没有半点灰尘。从天花板上吊下来一些大灯，使整个房间
沐浴在明亮的蓝白光中。房间里完全空荡荡的，除了远处的尽头。尽头处有一部带轮子的巨
型摄影机，一大群奥帕—伦帕人正围着它给机件接合处加油，调整它的旋钮，擦它那些巨大
的玻璃镜片。所有的奥帕—伦帕人都穿着非常特殊的衣服。他们穿着全套鲜红的太空服（至
少看来是太空服），包括头盔和护目镜，正在沉默地工作着。看着他们，查理觉得有一种奇
怪的危险感觉。这些奥帕—伦帕人都很清楚，整个工作中一定有某种危险性，因此他们在这
里不唧唧喳喳地说话，也不唱歌。只见他们穿着鲜红的太空服，在黑色的大摄影机上小心地
工作着。
在房间的另一头，离摄影机约五十步远，一个奥帕—伦帕人（也穿着太空服）正坐在一
张黑色的桌子旁，注视着一个极大的电视机荧光屏。
“我们来看看吧！”旺卡先生叫着，兴奋得蹦蹦跳跳，“这是一个实验室，正在试验我最新
最伟大的发明——电视巧克力糖！”
“什么是电视巧克力糖啊？”迈克•蒂维问道。
“我的天，小朋友，你别打断我的话！”旺卡先生说，“这种糖由电视机操纵。我本人不喜
欢看电视。我认为稍微看看没有问题，但小朋友似乎从来不肯稍微看看，他们要整天坐在电
视机前，眼睛死死盯住荧光屏……”
“我就是这样！”迈克•蒂维说。
“住口！”蒂维先生说。
“谢谢你。”旺卡先生说，“我现在来告诉你们，我这台惊人的电视机是怎样工作的。但首
先，你们知道普通的电视机是怎样工作的吗？非常简单。在拍图像的一边，有一部很大的摄
影机，是用来进行拍摄工作的。它随后把拍摄出来的图像分解为几百万个微粒，小得肉眼都
看不见，这些微粒由电力射上天空。在天上，它们嗖嗖地转，直到忽然碰了某些人家屋顶上
的天线，它们便顺着电线飞快地下来，直通到电视机的后面。然后，在电视机里轻轻移动，
直到那几百万个微粒走到正确的位置，重新组成图像（就像拼图游戏），于是一下子，图像
在荧光屏上出现了……”
“不完全是这样。”迈克•蒂维说。
“我的左耳朵有点聋，”旺卡先生说，“倘若我不能完全听到你的话，那便务请原谅。”
“我说不完全是这样。”迈克•蒂维叫道。
“你是个好孩子，”旺卡先生说，“就是话太多。好！我第一次看普通的电视机时，忽然闪
出一个惊人的念头。‘瞧！’我叫道，‘如果能够把一个图像分解成几百万个微粒，然后把这些
微粒呼呼地通过空气送出去，又能使它们在另一头重新组合起来，那么，我为什么不能用同
样的方法处理我的巧克力糖呢？我为什么不能把一块真正的巧克力糖用微粒通过空气传送，
使它们在另一头重新组合起来呢？’”
“不可能。”迈克•蒂维说。
“你认为不可能吗？”旺卡先生叫道，“好，你看这个！现在我通过电视，把一块最好的巧
克力糖从这房间的一头送到另一头！喂，准备好！把巧克力糖拿来！”
六名奥帕—伦帕人立刻迈步上前，肩上扛着一块查理有生以来第一次看到的最大的巧克
力糖。它和家里睡觉用的床垫一样大。
“它一定要大，”旺卡先生解释说，“因为任何时候，东西通过电视传送，出来时总比进去
时小得多。就说普通的电视吧，你拍摄一个很大的人，他在荧光屏上出现时，从不会比一支
铅笔高，对吗？好，我们来拍摄吧！准备！不，不，停！别动！我说你！迈克•蒂维，往后
退！你太接近摄影机了！那东西放出危险的射线！它们一下子就能把你分解为千百万个微
粒！因此奥帕—伦帕人要穿上太空服！太空服能保护他们！好！现在好一点儿了！那么准
备，开始！”
一个奥帕—伦帕人抓住一个大把手，把它向下一拉。
一道使人目眩的光发射出来。
“巧克力糖不见了！”约瑟夫爷爷挥着双臂大叫。
他说得一点儿不错！一大块巧克力糖消失在空气中了！
“它在运行！”旺卡先生叫道，“它已经变成一百万个微粒，现在正冲过我们头顶上的空
气。快，到这边来！”他冲到房间的另一头，那里放着一台大型电视机。其他人紧紧跟着
他。“看着荧光屏！”他叫道，“它来了！瞧！”
荧光屏闪烁不定，亮了起来。忽然，一小块巧克力糖出现在荧光屏当中。
“把它拿下来吧！”旺卡先生喊道。他愈来愈兴奋。
“怎么能拿下来呢？”迈克•蒂维哈哈笑着问，“它只是电视荧光屏上的一个图像罢了。”
“查理•巴克特，”旺卡先生叫道，“你去把它拿下来！伸出手去抓住它！”
查理伸出手去摸荧光屏，忽然，真是一个奇迹，那块巧克力糖落到了他的手指之间。他
惊奇得几乎把它掉在地上了。
“吃吧！”旺卡先生叫道，“把它吃下去！味道好极了！是你们刚才看到的那块大巧克力
糖！只不过一路上变小了！”
“完全不可思议！”约瑟夫爷爷喘着气说，“这是……这是……这是一个奇迹！”
“只要想象一下，”旺卡先生叫道，“等到我开始在全国推出它时……你会坐在家里看电
视，荧光屏上忽然闪出一个广告，一个声音说：‘请吃旺卡的巧克力糖！天下第一！如果不
信，请亲口尝一尝——来了！’你只要伸出手去拿一块就成了！怎么样，嗯？”
“了不起！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“它将使世界大变样！”
27 Mike Teavee is Sent by Television
27 Mike Teavee is Sent by Television
Mike Teavee was even more excited than Grandpa Joe at seeing a bar of chocolate being
sent by television. ‘But Mr Wonka,’ he shouted, ‘can you send other things through the air
in the same way? Breakfast cereal, for instance?’
‘Oh, my sainted aunt!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Don’t mention that disgusting stuff in front of
me! Do you know what breakfast cereal is made of? It’s made of all those little curly
wooden shavings you find in pencil sharpeners!’
‘But could you send it by television if you wanted to, as you do chocolate?’ asked
Mike Teavee.
‘Of course I could!’
‘And what about people?’ asked Mike Teavee. ‘Could you send a real live person from
one place to another in the same way?’
‘A person!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Are you off your rocker?’
‘But could it be done?’
‘Good heavens, child, I really don’t know… I suppose it could… yes. I’m pretty sure it
could… of course it could… I wouldn’t like to risk it, though… it might have some very
nasty results…’
But Mike Teavee was already off and running. The moment he heard Mr Wonka
saying, ‘I’m pretty sure it could… of course it could,’ he turned away and started running
as fast as he could towards the other end of the room where the great camera was
standing. ‘Look at me!’ he shouted as he ran. ‘I’m going to be the first person in the
world to be sent by television!’
‘No, no, no, no!’ cried Mr Wonka.
‘Mike!’ screamed Mrs Teavee. ‘Stop! Come back! You’ll be turned into a million tiny
pieces!’
But there was no stopping Mike Teavee now. The crazy boy rushed on, and when he
reached the enormous camera, he jumped straight for the switch, scattering Oompa-
Loompas right and left as he went.
‘See you later, alligator!’ he shouted, and he pulled down the switch, and as he did so,
he leaped out into the full glare of the mighty lens.
There was a blinding flash.
Then there was silence.
Then Mrs Teavee ran forward… but she stopped dead in the middle of the room… and
she stood there… she stood staring at the place where her son had been… and her great
red mouth opened wide and she screamed, ‘He’s gone! He’s gone!’
‘Great heavens, he has gone!’ shouted Mr Teavee.
Mr Wonka hurried forward and placed a hand gently on Mrs Teavee’s shoulder. ‘We
shall have to hope for the best,’ he said. ‘We must pray that your little boy will come out
unharmed at the other end.’
‘Mike!’ screamed Mrs Teavee, clasping her head in her hands. ‘Where are you?’
‘I’ll tell you where he is,’ said Mr Teavee, ‘he’s whizzing around above our heads in a
million tiny pieces!’
‘Don’t talk about it!’ wailed Mrs Teavee.
‘We must watch the television set,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘He may come through any
moment.’
Mr and Mrs Teavee and Grandpa Joe and little Charlie and Mr Wonka all gathered
round the television and stared tensely at the screen. The screen was quite blank.
‘He’s taking a heck of a long time to come across,’ said Mr Teavee, wiping his brow.
‘Oh dear, oh dear,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘I do hope that no part of him gets left behind.’
‘What on earth do you mean?’ asked Mr Teavee sharply.
‘I don’t wish to alarm you,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘but it does sometimes happen that only
about half the little pieces find their way into the television set. It happened last week. I
don’t know why, but the result was that only half a bar of chocolate came through.’
Mrs Teavee let out a scream of horror. ‘You mean only a half of Mike is coming back
to us?’ she cried.
‘Let’s hope it’s the top half,’ said Mr Teavee.
‘Hold everything!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Watch the screen! Something’s happening!’
The screen had suddenly begun to flicker.
Then some wavy lines appeared.
Mr Wonka adjusted one of the knobs and the wavy lines went away.
And now, very slowly, the screen began to get brighter and brighter.
‘Here he comes!’ yelled Mr Wonka. ‘Yes, that’s him all right!’
‘Is he all in one piece?’ cried Mrs Teavee.
‘I’m not sure,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘It’s too early to tell.’
Faintly at first, but becoming clearer and clearer every second, the picture of Mike
Teavee appeared on the screen. He was standing up and waving at the audience and
grinning from ear to ear.
‘But he’s a midget!’ shouted Mr Teavee.
‘Mike,’ cried Mrs Teavee, ‘are you all right? Are there any bits of you missing?’
‘Isn’t he going to get any bigger?’ shouted Mr Teavee.
‘Talk to me, Mike!’ cried Mrs Teavee. ‘Say something! Tell me you’re all right!’
A tiny little voice, no louder than the squeaking of a mouse, came out of the television
set. ‘Hi, Mum!’ it said. ‘Hi, Pop! Look at me! I’m the first person ever to be sent by
television!’
‘Grab him!’ ordered Mr Wonka. ‘Quick!’
Mrs Teavee shot out a hand and picked the tiny figure of Mike Teavee out of the
screen.
‘Hooray!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘He’s all in one piece! He’s completely unharmed!’
‘You call that unharmed?’ snapped Mrs Teavee, peering at the little speck of a boy
who was now running to and fro across the palm of her hand, waving his pistols in the
air.
He was certainly not more than an inch tall.
‘He’s shrunk!’ said Mr Teavee.
‘Of course he’s shrunk,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘What did you expect?’
‘This is terrible!’ wailed Mrs Teavee. ‘What are we going to do?’
And Mr Teavee said, ‘We can’t send him back to school like this! He’ll get trodden on!
He’ll get squashed!’
‘He won’t be able to do anything!’ cried Mrs Teavee.
‘Oh, yes I will!’ squeaked the tiny voice of Mike Teavee. ‘I’ll still be able to watch
television!’
‘Never again!’ shouted Mr Teavee. ‘I’m throwing the television set right out the
window the moment we get home. I’ve had enough of television!’
When he heard this, Mike Teavee flew into a terrible tantrum. He started jumping up
and down on the palm of his mother’s hand, screaming and yelling and trying to bite her
fingers. ‘I want to watch television!’ he squeaked. ‘I want to watch television! I want to
watch television! I want to watch television!’
‘Here! Give him to me!’ said Mr Teavee, and he took the tiny boy and shoved him into
the breast pocket of his jacket and stuffed a handkerchief on top. Squeals and yells came
from inside the pocket, and the pocket shook as the furious little prisoner fought to get
out.
‘Oh, Mr Wonka,’ wailed Mrs Teavee, ‘how can we make him grow?’
‘Well,’ said Mr Wonka, stroking his beard and gazing thoughtfully at the ceiling, T
must say that’s a wee bit tricky. But small boys are extremely springy and elastic. They
stretch like mad. So what we’ll do, we’ll put him in a special machine I have for testing
the stretchiness of chewing-gum! Maybe that will bring him back to what he was.’
‘Oh, thank you!’ said Mrs Teavee.
‘Don’t mention it, dear lady.’
‘How far d’you think he’ll stretch?’ asked Mr Teavee.
‘Maybe miles,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Who knows? But he’s going to be awfully thin.
Everything gets thinner when you stretch it.’
‘You mean like chewing-gum?’ asked Mr Teavee.
‘Exactly.’
‘How thin will he be?’ asked Mrs Teavee anxiously.
‘I haven’t the foggiest idea,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘And it doesn’t really matter, anyway,
because we’ll soon fatten him up again. All we’ll have to do is give him a triple overdose
of my wonderful Supervitamin Chocolate. Supervitamin Chocolate contains huge
amounts of vitamin A and vitamin B. It also contains vitamin C, vitamin D, vitamin E,
vitamin F, vitamin G, vitamin I, vitamin J, vitamin K, vitamin L, vitamin M, vitamin N,
vitamin O, vitamin P, vitamin Q, vitamin R, vitamin T, vitamin U, vitamin V, vitamin W,
vitamin X, vitamin Y, and, believe it or not, vitamin Z! The only two vitamins it doesn’t
have in it are vitamin S, because it makes you sick, and vitamin H, because it makes you
grow horns on the top of your head, like a bull. But it does have in it a very small
amount of the rarest and most magical vitamin of them all - vitamin Wonka.’
‘And what will that do to him?’ asked Mr Teavee anxiously.
‘It’ll make his toes grow out until they’re as long as his fingers…’
‘Oh, no!’ cried Mrs Teavee.
‘Don’t be silly,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘It’s most useful. He’ll be able to play the piano with
his feet.’
‘But Mr Wonka…’
‘No arguments, please!’ said Mr Wonka. He turned away and clicked his fingers three
times in the air. An Oompa- Loompa appeared immediately and stood beside him.
‘Follow these orders,’ said
Mr Wonka, handing the Oompa-Loompa a piece of paper on which he had written full
instructions. ‘And you’ll find the boy in his father’s pocket. Off you go! Good-bye, Mr
Teavee! Good-bye, Mrs Teavee! And please don’t look so worried! They all come out in
the wash, you know; every one of them…’
At the end of the room, the Oompa-Loompas around the giant camera were already
beating their tiny drums and beginning to jog up and down to the rhythm.
‘There they go again!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘I’m afraid you can’t stop them singing.’
Little Charlie caught Grandpa Joe’s hand, and the two of them stood beside Mr Wonka
in the middle of the long bright room, listening to the Oompa-Loompas. And this is what
they sang:
‘ The most important thing we’ve learned,
So far as children are concerned,
Is never, NEVER , NEVER let
Them near your television set -
Or better still, just don’t install
The idiotic thing at all.
In almost every house we’ve been,
We’ve watched them gaping at the screen.
They loll and slop and lounge about,
And stare until their eyes pop out.
(Last week in someone’s place we saw
A dozen eyeballs on the floor.)
They sit and stare and stare and sit
Until they’re hypnotized by it,
Until they’re absolutely drunk
With all that shocking ghastly junk.
Oh yes, we know it keeps them still,
They don’t climb out the window sill,
They never fight or kick or punch,
They leave you free to cook the lunch
And wash the dishes in the sink -
But did you ever stop to think,
To wonder just exactly what
This does to your beloved tot?
IT ROTS THE SENSES IN THE HEAD!
IT KILLS IMAGINA TION DEAD!
IT CLOGS AND CLUTTERS UP THE MIND!
IT MAKES A CHILD SO DULL AND BLIND
HE CAN NO LONGER UNDERSTAND
A FANTASY, A FAIRYLAND!
HIS BRAIN BECOMES AS SOFT AS CHEESE!
HIS POWERS OF THINKING RUST AND FREEZE!
HE CAN NO T THINK - HE ONLY SEES!
“All right!” you’ll cry. “All right!” you’ll say,
“But if we take the set away,
What shall we do to entertain
Our darling children! Please explain!”
We’ll answer this by asking you,
“What used the darling ones to do?
How used they keep themselves contented
Before this monster was invented?”
Have you for gotten? Don’t you know?
We’ll say it very loud and slow:
THEY… USED… TO… READ! They’d
READ and READ,
AND READ and READ, and then proceed
TO READ some more. Great Scott! Gadzooks!
One half their lives was reading books!
The nursery shelves held books galore!
Books cluttered up the nursery floor!
And in the bedroom, by the bed,
More books were waiting to be read!
Such wondrous, fine, fantastic tales
Of dragons, gypsies, queens, and whales
And treasure isles, and distant shores
Where smugglers rowed with muffled oars,
And pirates wearing purple pants,
And sailing ships and elephants,
And cannibals crouching round the pot,
Stirring away at something hot.
(It smells so good, what can it be?
Good gracious, it’s Penelope.)
The younger ones had Beatrix Potter
With Mr Tod, the dirty rotter,
And Squirrel JVutkin, Pigling Bland,
And Mrs Tiggy-Winkle and -
Just How The Camel Got His Hump,
And How The Monkey Lost His Rump,
And Mr Toad, and bless my soul,
There’s Mr Rat and Mr Mole -
Oh, books, what books they used to know,
Those children living long ago!
So please, oh please, we beg, we pray,
Go throw your TV set away,
And in its place you can install
A lovely bookshelf on the wall.
Then fill the shelves with lots of books,
Ignoring all the dirty looks,
The screams and yells, the bites and kicks,
And children hitting you with sticks -
Fear not, because we promise you
That, in about a week or two
Of having nothing else to do,
They’ll now begin to feel the need
Of having something good to read.
And once they start - oh boy, oh boy!
You watch the slowly growing joy
That fills their hearts. They’ll grow so keen
They’ll wonder what they’d ever seen
In that ridiculous machine,
That nauseating, foul, unclean.
Repulsive television screen!
And later, each and every kid
Will love you more for what you did.
P.S. Regarding Mike Teavee,
We very much regret that we
Shall simply have to wait and see
If we can get him back his height.
But if we can’t - it serves him right.’
27　迈克·蒂维被电视传送
27　迈克•蒂维被电视传送
迈克•蒂维亲眼看到一块巧克力糖能这样被电视传送，甚至比约瑟夫爷爷还要兴奋。“不过
旺卡先生，”他叫道，“你能用这个办法传送别的东西吗，例如早餐的麦片？”
“噢，我的已进天国的姑妈呀！”旺卡先生叫道，“不要在我面前提起这种倒胃口的东西！
你知道早餐吃的麦片是用什么东西做的吗？它是用铅笔刀削出来的那些铅笔的小木屑做成
的！”
“不过要传送的话，你能像巧克力糖一样用电视传送吗？”迈克•蒂维问道。
“我当然能够！”
“那么人呢？”迈克•蒂维又问，“你能用同样的办法把一个真正的活人从一个地方传送到另
一个地方吗？”
“一个人！”旺卡先生叫道，“你疯了吗？”
“但能做到吗？”
“天哪，小朋友，我实在不知道……我想是能做到的……对，我十分有把握能做到……当
然能做到……不过我不想冒这个险……结果可能十分糟糕……”
但是迈克•蒂维已经跑开了。当他听到旺卡先生说“我十分有把握能做到……当然能做
到……”时已经一个转身拼命地跑，一直奔到放着摄影机的房间的另一边。“瞧我吧！”他边跑
边叫，“我要做世界上第一个被电视传送的人！”
“不要！不要！不要！不要！”旺卡先生叫道。
“迈克！”蒂维太太哇哇大叫，“停下！回来！你会变成一百万个微粒的！”
但现在已经没有办法阻止迈克•蒂维了。这发疯的孩子向前直奔。当他到达那巨型摄影机
前时，便一直冲向开关把手，一路上把那些奥帕—伦帕人左右推开。
“再见，短吻鳄！”他叫道，把开关把手拉下去，同时跳到强力镜片的耀眼强光中。
一道使人目眩的闪光。
接着是一片寂静。
然后蒂维太太向前跑……但是跑到房间中间，她停下来呆若木鸡……她站在那里……她
站在那里盯住她儿子曾经站过的地方看……她那张血红的大口张得老大，哇哇大叫起来：“他
不见了！他不见了！”
“天哪！他已经不见了！”蒂维先生大叫道。
旺卡先生急忙跑上前，把一只手轻轻放在蒂维太太的肩上。“我们要向好的方面想，”他
说，“我们必须祈祷，希望你的孩子安全无恙地从另一头出来。”
“迈克！”蒂维太太双手抱着头哇哇叫，“你在哪里？”
“我来告诉你他在哪里，”蒂维先生说，“他变成了一百万个微粒，正在我们的头顶上嘶嘶
地转！”
“不要说出这种话来！”蒂维太太嚎啕大哭。
“我们必须去看电视机，”旺卡先生说，“他随时可能出来的。”
蒂维先生和他太太、约瑟夫爷爷和小查理，还有旺卡先生，他们聚在电视机周围紧张地
盯住荧光屏看。荧光屏上一片空白。
“他要花该死的漫长时间才能到这里来。”蒂维先生擦着他的眉毛说。
“噢，天哪，天哪！”旺卡先生说，“但愿他没有剩下一点儿留在那边。”
“你这话是什么意思？”蒂维先生尖利地问道。
“我不想吓唬你们，”旺卡先生说，“但有时候的确有这种事发生，只有一半左右的小微粒
能找到路到电视机这里来。上星期就发生过一次。我不知道是什么道理，结果是只有半块巧
克力糖出来了。”
蒂维太太吓得哇哇尖叫。“你是说只有半个迈克会回到我们这里来吗？”她叫道。
“但愿是上半个。”蒂维先生说。
“准备好！”旺卡先生说，“看着荧光屏！有动静了！”
荧光屏忽然开始闪烁。
接着出现一些波浪线。旺卡先生调整其中一个旋钮，波浪线消失了。
现在，荧光屏很慢很慢地开始变得越来越亮。
“他来了！”旺卡先生大叫，“对，没错，是他！”
“他完整无缺吗？”蒂维太太叫道。
“我不敢肯定，”旺卡先生说，“说这话还早。”
先是模模糊糊，但一秒钟比一秒钟清楚，迈克•蒂维的图像在荧光屏上出现了。他站在那
里对观众们招手，咧大了嘴在笑。
“但他变成了一个侏儒！”蒂维先生叫道。
“迈克，”蒂维太太叫道，“你没事吧？你身上有没有少了什么？”
“他不会再变大一点儿了吗？”蒂维先生叫道。
“对我说话呀，迈克！”蒂维太太叫道，“说句话呀！告诉我你没事呀！”
从电视机里传来一个很小的声音，不比老鼠的吱吱声响。“你好，妈妈！”迈克说，“你
好，爸爸！你们看我吧！我是第一个被电视传送的人！”
“抓住他！”旺卡先生吩咐说，“快！”
蒂维太太忙伸出一只手，把迈克的微小身体从荧光屏上捡了出来。
“万岁！”旺卡先生叫道，“他完整无缺！安然无恙！”
“你说这是安然无恙？”蒂维太太大声说，看着那个小不点儿在她的手掌上跑来跑去，挥
动着他手中的枪。
他连一英寸高也没有。
“他缩小了！”蒂维先生说。
“他当然缩小了，”旺卡先生说，“你还想怎样？”
“这太可怕了！”蒂维太太号叫着，“我们将怎么办呢？”
蒂维先生说：“他这个样子，我们不能送他去上学了！他会被人踩扁的！他会被压烂
的！”
“他什么也不能做了！”蒂维太太叫道。
“噢，我能做！”迈克•蒂维发出细微的吱吱尖叫声，“我仍旧可以看电视！”
“永远不许再看了！”蒂维先生吼叫道，“一回到家，我就把电视机扔出窗口。电视叫我受
够了！”
一听见这话，迈克•蒂维可怕地大发脾气。他在他妈妈的手掌上开始一上一下地砰砰乱
跳，大叫大嚷，甚至要咬她的手指。“我要看电视！”他尖叫，“我要看电视！我要看电视！我
要看电视！”
“来！把他交给我！”蒂维先生说着，抓起这小不点儿，塞进上衣的胸前口袋，再在上面
塞上一块手帕。口袋里传出大喊大叫声，口袋动来动去，关在里面的那个怒气冲天的小囚徒
挣扎着要出来。
“噢，旺卡先生，”蒂维太太号叫道，“我们怎么能让他大起来呢？”
“这个嘛，”旺卡先生一边说，一边捋着他的胡子，凝视着天花板想办法，“我必须说，这
有点儿复杂。不过小孩子极富弹性和伸缩性，他们会发疯似的长高。因此我们可以这么办，
把他放进一个特殊的机器，那是我用来试验口香糖的拉力的！也许那样会使他恢复原来的样
子。”
“噢，那就谢谢你了！”蒂维太太说。
“不用谢，亲爱的女士。”
“你想他能拉多长呢？”蒂维先生问道。
“也许几米，”旺卡先生说，“谁知道呢？不过他将变得奇瘦。任何东西拉长了总是变瘦
的。”
“你是说像口香糖那样？”蒂维先生问道。
“一点儿不错。”
“他将瘦到什么程度呢？”蒂维太太着急地问。
“我一点儿也想象不出来，”旺卡先生说，“不过这并没有关系，因为我们很快就能把他弄
胖。我只要过量三倍地给他吃我制造的奇妙的超级维生素巧克力就行。超级维生素巧克力包
含大量的维生素A和维生素B。它还包含维生素C、维生素D、维生素E、维生素F、维生素G、
维生素I、维生素J、维生素K、维生素L、维生素M、维生素N、维生素O、维生素P、维生素
Q、维生素R、维生素T、维生素U、维生素V、维生素W、维生素X、维生素Y，同时，不管
你相信不相信，还有维生素Z！只有两种维生素不包含在内，一种是维生素S，因为它使你想
吐，还有一种是维生素H，因为它使你像牛那样在头顶上长出角。但这种维生素巧克力还含有
少量最稀有、最奇妙的一种维生素——维生素旺卡。”
“这对他有什么好处？”蒂维先生焦急地问道。
“使他的脚趾长得和手指一样长……”
“噢，不要！”蒂维太太叫道。
“别傻了，”旺卡先生说，“这是最有用的。这样他可以用脚来弹钢琴。”
“不过，旺卡先生……”
“请不要争论了！”旺卡先生说。他转过身去，弹了三下手指。一名奥帕—伦帕人马上出
现，站在他的身边。“照上面写的办。”旺卡先生说着，交给奥帕—伦帕人一张纸，他已经在
上面写好了全部的指示，“那男孩就在他爸爸的衣袋里。”他又转过身说道，“你们走吧！再
见，蒂维先生！再见，蒂维太太！请你们不要那么愁眉苦脸的！他们全都会从车间里出来
的，你们知道，一个不漏，到时自然会真相大白……”
在车间尽头，围着那部巨型摄影机的奥帕—伦帕人再次敲起他们的小鼓，开始按着节奏
上下摆动他们的身体。
“他们又来了，”旺卡先生说，“我想你们没有办法使他们不唱歌。”
小查理抓住约瑟夫爷爷的手。在又长又亮的车间当中，他们两个站在旺卡先生身边，听
着那些奥帕—伦帕人唱歌。这就是他们唱的：
关于孩子们的事，
我们至今学会的就是：
永远永远永远不可以
让他们走近你的电视机——
最好就是，
根本不放那个傻玩意儿。
如今随便走进哪一座房子，
都看见小朋友目瞪口呆在看电视。
他们躺着，靠着，坐着看个没完没了，
直看到连眼珠都突出，落掉。
（上星期我们在一户人家，
看到地上眼珠足足有一打。）
他们坐着，看着，看着，坐着，
和这糟透的废物难分难舍，
直到被它完全催眠，
直到像喝醉了酒一般。
哦，对了，我们知道它能使他们安静下来，
他们也就不会去爬窗台，
他们也就不会打架，闹翻天，
让你可以安心烧饭，
让你可以安心洗碗、刷锅……
但你有没有停下来想过，
有没有好好地想一想，
它对你的小宝宝有什么影响？
它使头脑乱糟糟！
它使想象力丧失掉！
它搅乱人心！
它使小朋友变蠢：
他再也不能理解，
幻想和童话世界！
他的脑子变得和干酪一样软！
他的思维能力生锈，凝滞不前！
他不会想，只会看！
“好吧！”你会说。“好吧！”你会叫，
“我们就把电视机拿掉，
但我们又拿什么给小朋友消遣，
倒是请你说说看！”
我们倒要请你先说说，
小宝贝们一向怎么过？
在那怪物发明之前，
他们满足于什么消遣？
你难道不知道？你难道已经忘记？
让我们大声地一个字一个字告诉你：
他们……一向……读书！
他们读啊，读啊，不停地读，
读了又读。我的天！
读书占了他们一生的一半时间！
儿童室里，架子上面书都摆满！
书还撒了一地板！
卧室里，在床边，
还有更多的书等着去念！
童话是那么精彩有趣，
讲龙、吉卜赛人、王后、鲸，
讲宝岛和遥远的海岸，
那里走私者正偷偷地划着船，
讲穿紫色裤子的海盗和大王，
讲帆船和大象，
讲食人生番围着锅子，蹲在那里，
搅拌着什么热气腾腾的东西。
（那是什么，这样香喷喷？
天哪，是珀涅罗珀这个大美人 [1] 。）
小点儿的孩子读波特 [2] 的书，
有托德先生那废物，
有松鼠纳特金、小猪布兰德，
有蒂吉•温克尔夫人和……
骆驼的驼峰怎么得到，
猴子的尾巴怎么失掉。
我的天哪，书上还有癞蛤蟆先生、
田鼠先生和鼹鼠先生 [3] ……
噢，很久以前的小朋友，
书，这样的书他们看得烂熟！
因此，请你们，噢，我们向你们请求，
把你们家的电视机扔走，
在墙边原来放电视机的地方，
把个可爱的书架装上。
然后在书架上放满书本，
不要怕孩子们把你瞪，
别理他们又喊又叫，又踢又咬，
甚至用棍子把你敲……
不用怕，因为我们可以向你保证，
最多一两个星期光景，
他们无事可做，过于无聊，
就会开始感到有读点好东西的需要。
一旦他们开始——好家伙，好家伙！
你就会发觉，他们满心快活，
他们变得聪明伶俐，
到时他们就要开始怀疑，
以前在荒谬可笑的电视机，
在令人作呕的荧光屏里，
所看到过的东西！
以后，每一个孩子，
会因为你的做法而更加爱你。
附带说说，关于迈克•蒂维，很抱歉，
我们只好等着看，看恢复他的原来高度能否办到。
如果不能——也是他自作自受。
[1]珀涅罗珀，希腊神话中英雄奥德修斯的妻子。
[2]比阿特丽克斯•波特（1866-1943），英国儿童文学女作家。
[3]这三个是英国儿童文学作家格雷厄姆的童话《柳林风声》中的人物。
28 Only Charlie Left
28 Only Charlie Left
‘Which room shall it be next?’ said Mr Wonka as he turned away and darted into the lift.
‘Come on! Hurry up! We must get going! And how many children are there left now?’
Little Charlie looked at Grandpa Joe, and Grandpa Joe looked back at little Charlie.
‘But Mr Wonka,’ Grandpa Joe called after him, ‘there’s… there’s only Charlie left
now.’
Mr Wonka swung round and stared at Charlie.
There was a silence. Charlie stood there holding tightly on to Grandpa Joe’s hand.
‘You mean you’re the only one left?’ Mr Wonka said, pretending to be surprised.
‘Why, yes,’ whispered Charlie. ‘Yes.’
Mr Wonka suddenly exploded with excitement. ‘But my dear boy,’ he cried out, ‘that
means you’ve won!’ He rushed out of the lift and started shaking Charlie’s hand so
furiously it nearly came off. ‘Oh, I do congratulate you!’ he cried. ‘I really do! I’m
absolutely delighted! It couldn’t be better! How wonderful this is! I had a hunch, you
knew, right from the beginning, that it was going to be you! Well done, Charlie, well
done! This is terrific! Now the fun is really going to start! But we mustn’t dilly! We
mustn’t dally! There’s even less time to lose now than there was before! We have an
enormous number of things to do before the day is out! Just think of the arrangements
that have to be made! And the people we have to fetch! But luckily for us,
we have the great glass lift to speed things up! Jump in, my dear Charlie, jump in!
You too, Grandpa Joe, sir! No, no, after you! That’s the way! Now then! This time I shall
choose the button we are going to press!’ Mr Wonka’s bright twinkling blue eyes rested
for a moment on Charlie’s face.
Something crazy is going to happen now, Charlie thought. But he wasn’t frightened.
He wasn’t even nervous. He was just terrifically excited. And so was Grandpa Joe. The
old man’s face was shining with excitement as he watched every move that Mr Wonka
made. Mr Wonka was reaching for a button high up on the glass ceiling of the lift.
Charlie and Grandpa Joe both craned their necks to read what it said on the little label
beside the button.
It said… UP AND OUT.
‘Up and out,’ thought Charlie. ‘What sort of a room is that?’
Mr Wonka pressed the button.
The glass doors closed.
‘Hold on!’ cried Mr Wonka.
Then WHAM! The lift shot straight up like a rocket! ‘Yippee!’ shouted Grandpa Joe.
Charlie was clinging to Grandpa Joe’s legs and Mr Wonka was holding on to a strap from
the ceiling, and up they went, up, up, up, straight up this time, with no twistings or
turnings, and Charlie could hear the whistling of the air outside as the lift went faster
and faster. ‘Yippee!’ shouted Grandpa Joe again. ‘Yippee! Here we go!’
‘Faster!’ cried Mr Wonka, banging the wall of the lift with his hand. ‘Faster! Faster! If
we don’t go any faster than this, we shall never get through!’
‘Through what?’ shouted Grandpa Joe. ‘What have we got to get through?’
‘Ah-ha!’ cried Mr Wonka, ‘you wait and see! I’ve been longing to press this button for
years! But I’ve never done it until now! I was tempted many times! Oh, yes, I was
tempted! But I couldn’t bear the thought of making a great big hole in the roof of the
factory! Here we go, boys! Up and out!’
‘But you don’t mean…’ shouted Grandpa Joe, ‘… you don’t really mean that this lift…’
‘Oh yes, I do!’ answered Mr Wonka. ‘You wait and see! Up and out!’
‘But… but… but… it’s made of glass!’ shouted Grandpa Joe. ‘It’ll break into a million
pieces!’
‘I suppose it might,’ said Mr Wonka, cheerful as ever, ‘but it’s pretty thick glass, all the
same.’
The lift rushed on, going up and up and up, faster and faster and faster…
Then suddenly, CRASH! - and the most tremendous noise of splintering wood and
broken tiles came from directly above their heads, and Grandpa Joe shouted, ‘Help! It’s
the end! We’re done for!’ and Mr Wonka said, ‘No, we’re not! We’re through! We’re out!’
Sure enough, the lift had shot right up through the roof of the factory and was now
rising into the sky like a rocket, and the sunshine was pouring in through the glass roof.
In five seconds they were a thousand feet up in the sky.
‘The lift’s gone mad!’ shouted Grandpa Joe.
‘Have no fear, my dear sir,’ said Mr Wonka calmly, and he pressed another button.
The lift stopped. It stopped and hung in mid-air, hovering like a helicopter, hovering
over the factory and over the very town itself which lay spread out below them like a
picture postcard! Looking down through the glass floor on which he was standing,
Charlie could see the small far-away houses and the streets and the snow that lay thickly
over everything. It was an eerie and frightening feeling to be standing on clear glass
high up in the sky. It made you feel that you weren’t standing on anything at all.
‘Are we all right?’ cried Grandpa Joe. ‘How does this thing stay up?’
‘Sugar power!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘One million sugar power! Oh, look,’ he cried, pointing
down, ‘there go the other children! They’re returning home!’
28　只剩下一个查理了
　　28　只剩下一个查理了
　　“我们现在去哪一个车间呢？”旺卡先生转身冲进电梯说，“来吧，赶快！我们得走了！现在剩下几个小朋友啦？”
　　小查理看着约瑟夫爷爷，同时约瑟夫爷爷也正看着小查理。
　　“可是旺卡先生，”约瑟夫爷爷在他后面叫，“现在……现在只剩下一个小查理了。”
　　旺卡先生猛地转过身来，看着查理。
　　这时一片寂静。查理站着，紧紧握住约瑟夫爷爷的手。
　　“你是说，只剩下你一个了？”旺卡先生装出大吃一惊的样子说。
　　“是的，”查理轻轻地说，“是的。”
　　旺卡先生忽然变得异常高兴。“我亲爱的小朋友，”他叫起来，“这是说你赢了！”他从电梯里冲出来，开始和查理握手。他摇得那么厉害，查理的手几乎都被拉下来了。“噢，我祝贺你！”他说道，“我衷心祝贺你！我高兴极了！真是再好不过了！多么好啊！你知道，一开头我就有一种预感，这将是你！做得好，查理，做得好！真是好极了！现在乐趣真正要开始了，不过我们绝不可以慢下来！我们绝不可以拖延！现在比先前更不能浪费时间！在天黑之前，我们有大量的事情要做！只要想想必须作出的安排！想想我们要找的人！幸亏我们有这部大玻璃电梯，它可以使事情加快！进去吧！我亲爱的查理，进去吧！还有你，约瑟夫爷爷老先生！不，不，你先进去！对了！好！这一次由我来挑选按钮！”旺卡先生明亮而闪烁的蓝眼睛向查理的脸看了一下。
　　查理想：“现在一定是要发生一些疯狂的事情。”但是他不怕。他甚至不紧张。他只是无比兴奋。约瑟夫爷爷也一样。这位老人家看着旺卡先生的一举一动，脸上兴奋得闪光。旺卡先生把手伸到电梯高高的玻璃天花板上去按一个按钮。查理和约瑟夫爷爷双双伸长脖子去看那按钮旁边的小标签。
　　上面写着：上去，出去。
　　“上去，出去，”查理心里想，“这是个什么车间呢？”
　　旺卡先生按了按钮。
　　玻璃门关上了。
　　“抓紧！”旺卡先生叫道。
　　接着，呜！电梯像火箭似的向上直冲。“好啊！”约瑟夫爷爷大叫。查理紧抱着约瑟夫爷爷的腿，旺卡先生抓住从天花板上垂下来的皮带。这一回他们上去，上去，上去，一直上去，不绕圈，也不拐弯。电梯愈开愈快的时候，查理只听见外面的空气嗖嗖地响。“好啊！”约瑟夫爷爷又叫，“好啊，我们在上升！”
　　“快一点儿！”旺卡先生用手拍着电梯的墙壁叫道，“快一点儿！快一点儿！如果不开得快一点儿，我们就冲不过去了！”
　　“冲不过什么？”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“我们要冲过什么？”
　　“啊哈！”旺卡先生叫道，“你等着瞧吧！多少年来，我一直渴望按这个按钮！直到现在我才如愿以偿！我许多次都快忍不住了！噢，不错！我都快忍不住了！但一想到要在工厂屋顶上撞穿一个大洞，我又舍不得！这次我们穿过去吧，伙计！上去，出去！”
　　“你的意思不是……”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“你不是真要这电梯……”
　　“噢，是的，我正要这样！”旺卡先生回答说，“你等着瞧吧！上去，然后出去！”
　　“不过……不过……不过……电梯是玻璃造的！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“它要撞得粉碎！”
　　“我想有这个可能，”旺卡先生说，但还是那么兴高采烈，“不过玻璃很厚。”
　　电梯向上一直冲啊冲，愈冲愈快，愈冲愈快……忽然之间，哗啦！一阵震耳欲聋的木头破裂声和瓦片破碎声直接从他们的头顶上传下来。约瑟夫爷爷大叫：“救命啊！完了！我们没命了！”
　　但旺卡先生说：“不，我们没有完！我们冲过去了！我们出去了！”一点儿不错，电梯已经穿过工厂的屋顶，正像火箭一样直上云霄，阳光透过玻璃顶照了进来。只五秒钟，他们已经在三百多米的高空了。
　　“这电梯发疯了！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道。
　　“不要怕，我亲爱的老先生。”旺卡先生镇静地说着，去按另外一个按钮，电梯停下了。
　　它悬停在空中，像一架直升机那样悬在工厂和市镇上空。市镇像一张风景明信片那样，在他们下面展开。透过他们站着的玻璃地板看下去，查理可以看到远远的小房子、小街道和盖在所有东西上面的积雪。在高空中，站在明净的玻璃上使人有一种奇怪和恐惧的感觉，它使你觉得好像根本没有站在任何东西上面。
　　“我们不会有事吧？”约瑟夫爷爷叫道，“这玩意儿怎么能在空中停住呢？”
　　“这是糖的力量！”旺卡先生说，“一百万的糖力！噢，瞧！”他指着下面叫道，“其他几个小朋友！他们正在回家呢！”
29 The Other Children Go Home
29 The Other Children Go Home
‘We must go down and take a look at our little friends before we do anything else,’ said
Mr Wonka. He pressed a different button, and the lift dropped lower, and soon it was
hovering just above the entrance gates to the factory.
Looking down now, Charlie could see the children and their parents standing in a
little group just inside the gates.
‘I can only see three,’ he said. ‘Who’s missing?’
‘I expect it’s Mike Teavee,’ Mr Wonka said. ‘But he’ll be coming along soon. Do you
see the trucks?’ Mr Wonka pointed to a line of gigantic covered vans parked in a line
near by.
‘Yes,’ Charlie said. ‘What are they for?’
‘Don’t you remember what it said on the Golden Tickets? Every child goes home with
a lifetime’s supply of sweets. There’s one truckload for each of them, loaded to the brim.
Ah-ha,’ Mr Wonka went on, ‘there goes our friend Augustus Gloop! D’you see him? He’s
getting into the first truck with his mother and father!’
‘You mean he’s really all right?’ asked Charlie, astonished. ‘Even after going up that
awful pipe?’
‘He’s very much all right,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘He’s changed!’ said Grandpa Joe, peering down through the glass wall of the elevator.
‘He used to be fat! Now he’s thin as a straw!’
‘Of course he’s changed,’ said Mr Wonka, laughing. ‘He got squeezed in the pipe.
Don’t you remember? And look! There goes Miss Violet Beauregarde, the great gum-
chewer! It seems as though they managed to de-juice her after all. I’m so glad. And how
healthy she looks! Much better than before!’
‘But she’s purple in the face!’ cried Grandpa Joe.
‘So she is,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘Ah, well, there’s nothing we can do about that.’
‘Good gracious!’ cried Charlie. ‘Look at poor Veruca Salt and Mr Salt and Mrs Salt!
They’re simply covered with rubbish!’
‘And here comes Mike Teavee!’ said Grandpa Joe. ‘Good heavens! What have they
done to him? He’s about ten feet tall and thin as a wire!’
‘They’ve overstretched him on the gum-stretching machine,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘How
very careless.’
‘But how dreadful for him!’ cried Charlie.
‘Nonsense,’ said Mr Wonka, ‘he’s very lucky. Every basketball team in the country will
be trying to get him. But now,’ he added, ‘it is time we left these four silly children. I
have something very important to talk to you about, my dear Charlie.’ Mr Wonka
pressed another button, and the lift swung upwards into the sky.
29　其他孩子回家
　　29　其他孩子回家
　　“在我们去做其他事之前，必须先下去看看那几个小朋友。”旺卡先生说。他按了另一个按钮，电梯降得低一点儿，很快就在工厂大门口上面盘旋着。
　　查理向下望去，看到那几个孩子和他们的父母就在大门里面，站在一起。
　　“我只看到三个，”查理说，“少了哪一个？”
　　“我想是迈克•蒂维，”旺卡先生说，“不过他马上就到。你看见那些货车了吗？”旺卡先生指着一排有篷的巨型货车，它们排成一行停在附近。
　　“看见了，”查理说，“它们是做什么用的？”
　　“你不记得金奖券上的话了吗？每个孩子回家的时候将带回去够吃一辈子的糖果。一个孩子一货车，糖果装得满到边。啊哈……”旺卡先生继续说，“我们的朋友奥古斯塔斯•格卢普走过去了！看见他了没有？他和他的爸爸妈妈正在上第一辆货车！”
　　“你是说他真的没事了吗？”查理吃惊地问道，“甚至进了那根可怕的玻璃管以后还是好好的？”
　　“他完全没事了。”旺卡先生说。
　　“不过他变了！”约瑟夫爷爷透过电梯的玻璃墙看下去，“他本来是胖乎乎的，现在瘦得像一根稻草！”
　　“他当然变了，”旺卡先生哈哈笑着说，“他在管子里被挤瘦啦，你不记得了吗？再瞧瞧！
　　那是维奥莉特•博雷加德小姐，就是那位嚼口香糖大王！看来他们终于榨掉了她的果汁。我太高兴了。她看上去多么健康啊！比原先好多了！”
　　“不过她的脸是紫色的！”约瑟夫爷爷叫道。
　　“不错，”旺卡先生说，“唉，对于这件事，我们是无能为力了。”
　　“天哪！”查理叫道，“看看可怜的维鲁卡•索尔特、索尔特先生和索尔特太太吧，他们满身都是垃圾！”
　　“迈克•蒂维来了！”约瑟夫爷爷说，“我的天！他们把他怎么样啦？他有三米多高，瘦得却像一根铁丝！”
　　“他们在口香糖拉长机上把他拉过头了，”旺卡先生说，“多么不小心。”
　　“对他来说那是多么可怕啊！”查理叫道。
　　“胡说，”旺卡先生说，“他非常走运，全国每一个篮球队都会抢着要他。不过现在我们该离开这四个小傻瓜了。我有一件非常重要的事情要对你说，我亲爱的查理。”旺卡先生按了另一个按钮，电梯马上升上天空。
30 Charlie’s Chocolate Factory
30 Charlie’s Chocolate Factory
The great glass lift was now hovering high over the town. Inside the lift stood Mr
Wonka, Grandpa Joe, and little Charlie.
‘How I love my chocolate factory,’ said Mr Wonka, gazing down. Then he paused, and
he turned around and looked at Charlie with a most serious expression on his face. ‘Do
you love it too, Charlie?’ he asked.
‘Oh, yes,’ cried Charlie, T think it’s the most wonderful place in the whole world!’
‘I am very pleased to hear you say that,’ said Mr Wonka, looking more serious than
ever. He went on staring at Charlie. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am very pleased indeed to hear you
say that. And now I shall tell you why.’ Mr Wonka cocked his head to one side and all at
once the tiny twinkling wrinkles of a smile appeared around the corners of his eyes, and
he said, ‘You see, my dear boy, I have decided to make you a present of the whole place.
As soon as you are old enough to run it, the entire factory will become yours.’
Charlie stared at Mr Wonka. Grandpa Joe opened his mouth to speak, but no words
came out.
‘It’s quite true,’ Mr Wonka said, smiling broadly now. ‘I really am giving it to you.
That’s all right, isn’t it?’
‘Giving it to him?’ gasped Grandpa Joe. ‘You must be joking.’
‘I’m not joking, sir. I’m deadly serious.’
‘But… but… why should you want to give your factory to little Charlie?’
‘Listen,’ Mr Wonka said, ‘I’m an old man. I’m much older than you think. I can’t go on
for ever. I’ve got no children of my own, no family at all. So who is going to run the
factory when I get too old to do it myself? Someone’s got to keep it going - if only for the
sake of the Oompa-Loompas. Mind you, there are thousands of clever men who would
give anything for the chance to come in and take over from me, but I don’t want that
sort of person. I don’t want a grown-up person at all. A grown-up won’t listen to me; he
won’t learn. He will try to do things his own way and not mine. So I have to have a
child. I want a good sensible loving child, one to whom I can tell all my most precious
sweet-making secrets - while I am still alive.’
‘So that is why you sent out the Golden Tickets!’ cried Charlie.
‘Exactly!’ said Mr Wonka. ‘I decided to invite five children to the factory, and the one
I liked best at the end of the day would be the winner!’
‘But Mr Wonka,’ stammered Grandpa Joe, ‘do you really and truly mean that you are
giving the whole of this enormous factory to little Charlie? After all…’
‘There’s no time for arguments!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘We must go at once and fetch the
rest of the family - Charlie’s father and his mother and anyone else that’s around! They
can all live in the factory from now on! They can all help to run it until Charlie is old
enough to do it by himself! Where do you live, Charlie?’
Charlie peered down through the glass floor at the snow- covered houses that lay
below. ‘It’s over there,’ he said, pointing. ‘It’s that little cottage right on the edge of the
town, the tiny little one…’
‘I see it!’ cried Mr Wonka, and he pressed some more buttons and the lift shot down
towards Charlie’s house.
‘I’m afraid my mother won’t come with us,’ Charlie said sadly.
‘Why ever not?’
‘Because she won’t leave Grandma Josephine and Grandma Georgina and Grandpa
George.’
‘But they must come too.’
‘They can’t,’ Charlie said. ‘They’re very old and they haven’t been out of bed for
twenty years.’
‘Then we’ll take the bed along as well, with them in it,’ said Mr Wonka. ‘There’s
plenty of room in this lift for a bed.’
‘You couldn’t get the bed out of the house,’ said Grandpa Joe. ‘It won’t go through the
door.’
‘You mustn’t despair!’ cried Mr Wonka. ‘Nothing is impossible! You watch!’
The lift was now hovering over the roof of the Buckets’ little house.
‘What are you going to do?’ cried Charlie.
‘I’m going right on in to fetch them,’ said Mr Wonka.
‘How?’ asked Grandpa Joe.
‘Through the roof,’ said Mr Wonka, pressing another button.
‘No!’ shouted Charlie.
‘Stop!’ shouted Grandpa Joe.
CRASH went the lift, right down through the roof of the house into the old people’s
bedroom. Showers of dust and broken tiles and bits of wood and cockroaches and
spiders and bricks and cement went raining down on the three old ones who were lying
in bed, and each of them thought that the end of the world was come. Grandma
Georgina fainted, Grandma Josephine dropped her false teeth, Grandpa George put his
head under the blanket, and Mr and Mrs Bucket came rushing in from the next room.
‘Save us!’ cried Grandma Josephine.
‘Calm yourself, my darling wife,’ said Grandpa Joe, stepping out of the lift. ‘It’s only
us.’
‘Mother!’ cried Charlie, rushing into Mrs Bucket’s arms. ‘Mother! Mother! Listen to
what’s happened! We’re all going back to live in Mr Wonka’s factory and we’re going to
help him to run it and he’s given it all to me and… and… and… and…’
‘What are you talking about?’ said Mrs Bucket.
‘Just look at our house!’ cried poor Mr Bucket. ‘It’s in ruins!’
‘My dear sir,’ said Mr Wonka, jumping forward and shaking Mr Bucket warmly by the
hand, ‘I’m so very glad to meet you. You mustn’t worry about your house. From now on,
you’re never going to need it again, anyway.’
‘Who is this crazy man?’ screamed Grandma Josephine. ‘He could have killed us all.’
‘This,’ said Grandpa Joe, ‘is Mr Willy Wonka himself
It took quite a time for Grandpa Joe and Charlie to explain to everyone exactly what
had been happening to them all day. And even then they all refused to ride back to the
factory in the lift.
‘I’d rather die in my bed!’ shouted Grandma Josephine.
‘So would I!’ cried Grandma Georgina.
‘I refuse to go!’ announced Grandpa George.
So Mr Wonka and Grandpa Joe and Charlie, taking no notice of their screams, simply
pushed the bed into the lift. They pushed Mr and Mrs Bucket in after it. Then they got in
themselves. Mr Wonka pressed a button. The doors closed. Grandma Georgina screamed.
And the lift rose up off the floor and shot through the hole in the roof, out into the open
sky.
Charlie climbed on to the bed and tried to calm the three old people who were still
petrified with fear. ‘Please don’t be frightened,’ he said. ‘It’s quite safe. And we’re going
to the most wonderful place in the world!’
‘Charlie’s right,’ said Grandpa Joe.
‘Will there be anything to eat when we get there?’ asked Grandma Josephine. ‘I’m
starving! The whole family is starving!’
‘Anything to eat?’ cried Charlie laughing. ‘Oh, you just wait and see!’
30　小查理的巧克力工厂
　　30　小查理的巧克力工厂
　　现在玻璃大电梯在市镇上空高高盘旋。电梯里站着旺卡先生、约瑟夫爷爷和小查理。
　　“我多么爱我的巧克力工厂啊！”旺卡先生看着下面说。接着他住了口，转过身来，神色凝重地望着查理。“你也爱它吗，查理？”他问道。
　　“噢，是的，”查理叫道，“我认为它是全世界最了不起的地方！”
　　“听到你说这句话，我非常高兴。”旺卡先生说，样子比任何时候都认真。他继续凝视着查理。“真的，”他说，“听到你说这句话，我确实非常高兴。现在我来告诉你为什么。”旺卡先生把他的头歪到一边，两边眼角马上现出微笑的皱纹。他说：“你知道吗？我亲爱的孩子，我决定把整座工厂送给你。等你长大有能力经营它的时候，整座工厂就是你的了。”
　　查理瞪眼看着旺卡先生，约瑟夫爷爷张开口要说话，但是说不出话来。
　　“这完全是真话，”旺卡先生说，脸上堆满了笑容，“我的确要把它送给你。这不是很好吗？”
　　“送给他？”约瑟夫爷爷透不过气来，“你一定是在开玩笑。”
　　“我不是在开玩笑，老先生，我是非常认真的。”
　　“不过……不过……你为什么要把工厂送给小查理呢？”
　　“听我说，”旺卡先生说道，“我是一个老人了。我比你们想象的要老得多。我不能长生不老。我根本没有子女，没有家庭。因此，当我老得不能经营这工厂的时候，谁来经营它呢？
　　一定要有人继续经营它，就算是为了那些奥帕—伦帕人。告诉你们，有千千万万个聪明人会不惜一切寻找机会进入这工厂，从我手里把它弄走，但是我不要那种人。我根本就不要大人。大人不肯听我的话，也不肯学。他要照自己的办法而不是照我的办法去做。因此我必须有一个孩子。我要一个聪明可爱的好孩子，一个趁我活着时，能把我最宝贵的糖果制造秘密告诉他的孩子。”
　　“这就是你发金奖券的目的！”查理叫道。
　　“一点儿不错！”旺卡先生说，“我决定邀请五个小朋友到工厂里来。在这天结束时，我最喜欢的那个孩子就是胜利者！”
　　“可是旺卡先生，”约瑟夫爷爷结结巴巴地说，“你真的要把这整座大工厂交给小查理吗？
　　究竟……”
　　“没有时间争论了！”旺卡先生叫道，“我们必须马上去把你们的家人都接来——查理的爸爸妈妈和家里的其他人！从现在起，他们都可以住到工厂里来！他们可以帮助经营工厂，直到查理长大可以自己经营为止！你住在哪里，查理？”
　　查理透过玻璃地板，低头看着下面覆盖着白雪的房屋。“就在那边，”他指着说，“在市郊的那栋小木屋，那栋很小很小的……”
　　“我看见它了！”旺卡先生叫道。他又按了几个按钮，电梯便向查理家的木屋飞驰下去。
　　“我怕妈妈不肯跟我们一起来。”查理难过地说。
　　“为什么不肯？”
　　“她不会离开约瑟芬奶奶、乔治娜姥姥和乔治姥爷的。”
　　“但他们也要一起来呀。”
　　“他们不能来，”查理说，“他们太老了，已经有二十年没有下过床了。”
　　“那我们把他们连床一起带来好了！”旺卡先生说，“这电梯有足够的地方放下一张床。”
　　“你可没有办法把床弄出木屋，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“它出不了那道门。”
　　“你不用泄气！”旺卡先生叫道，“没有办不到的事情！你等着瞧吧！”
　　电梯这时已经在巴克特家的屋顶上盘旋。
　　“你要干什么？”查理叫道。
　　“我要马上进去把他们接出来。”旺卡先生说。
　　“怎么进去？”约瑟夫爷爷问道。
　　“穿过屋顶。”旺卡先生说着去按另一个按钮。
　　“不要！”查理大叫。
　　“停下！”约瑟夫爷爷大喊。
　　砰！电梯一直下去穿过木屋屋顶，进入了老人家的睡房。滚滚的灰尘、碎瓦、木片、蟑螂、蜘蛛、砖头、水泥像雨点一样落下去，落到躺在床上的三位老人家身上。他们都以为是世界末日到了。乔治娜姥姥晕过去了，约瑟芬奶奶落掉了她的假牙，乔治姥爷把头缩到了毯子底下，巴克特先生和巴克特太太急忙从隔壁房间里跑过来。
　　“救命啊！”约瑟芬奶奶叫道。
　　“不要怕，我亲爱的老伴，”约瑟夫爷爷从电梯里走出来说，“不过是我们罢了。”
　　“妈妈！”查理叫着扑到巴克特太太怀里，“妈妈！妈妈！我告诉你发生了什么事情！我们全都要住到旺卡先生的工厂里去，帮助他经营工厂。他把工厂送给我了，而且……而且……而且……而且……”
　　“你在说什么呀？”巴克特太太说。
　　“看看我们的房子吧！”可怜的巴克特先生叫道，“它已经变成了废墟！”
　　“我亲爱的巴克特先生，”旺卡先生说着跳上前，和巴克特先生热烈地握手，“很高兴见到你。你不用担心你的房子。反正从现在起，你再也用不着它了。”
　　“这个疯子是谁？”约瑟芬奶奶尖叫道，“他会把我们杀死的。”
　　“这位，”约瑟夫爷爷说，“就是威利•旺卡先生。”
　　约瑟夫爷爷和查理花了不少时间，才把他们这天所碰到的事情向大家解释清楚。尽管这样，大家还是拒绝乘电梯到工厂去。
　　“我宁愿死在我的床上！”约瑟芬奶奶叫道。
　　“我也一样！”乔治娜姥姥叫道。
　　“我不去。”乔治姥爷声明。
　　于是，旺卡先生、约瑟夫爷爷和查理不管他们大喊大叫，干脆把床推进了电梯。接着他们把巴克特先生和巴克特太太也推了进去。最后他们自己也进去了。旺卡先生按了一个按钮。电梯门关上。乔治娜姥姥哇哇大叫。电梯离地升起，冲出屋顶的大窟窿，直上云霄。
　　查理爬到床上，试着安慰三位被吓得呆若木鸡的老人家。“请不要害怕，”他说，“很安全的。我们现在要到世界上最了不起的地方去！”
　　“查理说得对。”约瑟夫爷爷说。
　　“我们到了那里有东西吃吗？”约瑟芬姥姥问道，“我在挨饿！全家在挨饿！”
　　“有没有东西吃？”查理哈哈笑着大叫，“噢，你就等着瞧吧！”
